The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mind Master, by Arthur J. Burks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mind Master

Author: Arthur J. Burks

Release Date: July 15, 2009 [EBook #29416]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIND MASTER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Dan Horwood and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Transcriber's Note:

 This etext was produced from "Astounding Stories" January and
 February, 1932. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
 that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.

 The original "What has gone before" recap section from the
 second part (February edition) has been removed from this
 combined version.

 Author's archaic and variable spelling is preserved.
 Author's punctuation style is preserved.
 Passages in italics indicated by _underscores_.
 Passages in bold indicated by =equal signs=.

 Typographical problems have been changed and are listed at the
 end of the text.
]


                  *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: Front cover of "Amazing Stories"]




The Mind Master

_Beginning a Two-Part Novel_

By Arthur J. Burks

[Illustration: _A sequel to "Manape the Mighty"_]




CHAPTER I

_The Tuft of Hair_


"Let's hope the horrible nightmare is over, dearest," whispered Ellen
Estabrook to Lee Bentley as their liner came crawling up through the
Narrows and the Statue of Liberty greeted the two with uplifted torch
beyond Staten Island. New York's skyline was beautiful through the
mist and smoke which always seemed to mask it. It was good to be home
again.

[Sidenote: Once more Lee Bentley is caught up in the marvelous
machinations of the mad genius Barter.]

Certainly it was a far cry from the African jungles where, for the
space of a ghastly nightmare, Ellen had been a captive of the apes
and Bentley himself had had a horrible adventure. Caleb Barter, a mad
scientist, had drugged him and exchanged his brain with that of an
ape, and for hours Bentley had roamed the jungles hidden in the great
hairy body, the only part of him remaining "Bentley" being the Bentley
brain which Barter had placed in the ape's skull-pan. Bentley would
never forget the horror of that grim awakening, in which he had found
himself walking on bent knuckles, his voice the fighting bellow of a
giant anthropoid.

[Illustration: _A bullet ploughed through the top of the ape's
head._]

Yes, it was a far cry from the African jungles to populous Manhattan.

As soon as Ellen and Lee considered themselves recovered from the
shock of the experience they would be married. They had already spent
two months of absolute rest in England after their escape from Africa,
but they found it had not been enough. Their story had been told in
the press of the world and they had been constantly besieged by the
curious, which of course had not helped them to forget.

     -     -     -

"Lee," whispered Ellen, "I'll never feel sure that Caleb Barter is
dead. We should have gone out that morning when he forgot to take his
whip and we thought the vengeful apes had slain him. We should have
proved it to our own satisfaction. It would be an ironic jest,
characteristic of Barter, to allow us to think him dead."

"He's dead all right, dear," replied Bentley, his nostrils quivering
with pleasure as he looked ahead at New York, while the breeze along
the Hudson pushed his hair back from his forehead. "He had abused the
great anthropoids for too many years. They seized their opportunity,
don't mistake that."

"Still, he was a genius in his way, a mad, frightful genius. It hardly
seems possible to me that he would allow himself to be so easily
trapped. It's a reflection on his great mentality, twisted though it
was."

"Forget it, dear," replied Bentley, putting his arm around her
shoulders. "We'll both try to forget. After our nerves have returned
to normal we'll be married. Then nothing can trouble us."

The vessel docked and later Lee and Ellen entered a taxicab near the
pier.

"I'll take you to your home, Ellen," said Bentley. "Then I'll look
after my own affairs for the next couple of days, which includes
making peace with my father, then we'll go on from here."

They looked through the windows of the cab as they rolled into lower
Fifth Avenue and headed uptown. Newsies were screaming an extra from
the sidewalks.

"Excitement!" said Bentley enthusiastically. "It's certainly good to
be home and hear a newsboy's unintelligible screaming of an extra,
isn't it?"

On an impulse he ordered the cabbie to draw up to the curb and
purchased a newspaper.

"Do you mind if I glance through the headlines?" Bentley asked Ellen.
"I haven't looked at an American paper for ever so long."

     -     -     -

The cab started again and Bentley folded the paper, falling easily
into the habit of New Yorkers who are accustomed to reading on
subways where there isn't room for elbows, to say nothing of broad
newspapers.

His eyes caught a headline. He started, frowning, but was instantly
mindful of Ellen. He mustn't show any signs that would excite her,
especially when he didn't yet understand what had caused his own
instant perturbation.

Had Ellen looked at him she might have seen merely the calm face of a
man mildly interested in the news of the day, but she was looking out
at the Fifth Avenue shops.

Bentley was staring again at the newspaper story:

  "An evil genius signing his 'manifestoes' with the strange
  cognomen of 'Mind Master' gives the authorities of New
  York City twelve hours in which to take precautions. To
  prove that he is able to make good his mad threats he
  states that at noon exactly, to-day, he will cause the
  death of the chief executive of a great insurance company
  whose offices are in the Flatiron Building. After that, at
  regular stated periods, warnings to be issued in each case
  ten hours in advance, he will steal the brains of the
  twenty men whose names are hereto appended:" (There
  followed then a list of names, all of which were known to
  Bentley.)

He understood why the story had startled him, too. "Mind Master!"
Anything that had to do with the human brain interested him mightily
now, for he knew to what grim uses it could be put at the hands of a
master scientist. Around his own head, safely covered by his hair
unless someone looked closely, and even then they must needs know what
they sought, was a thin white line. It marked the line of Caleb
Barter's operation on him that terrible night in the African jungles,
when his brain had been transferred to the skull-pan of an ape, and
the ape's brain to his own cranium. Any mention of the brain,
therefore, recalled to him a very harrowing experience.

It was little wonder that he shuddered.

Ellen noticed his agitation.

"What is it, dearest?" she asked softly, placing her hand in the crook
of his arm.

     -     -     -

He was about to answer her, desperately trying to think of something
to say that would not alarm her, when their taxicab, with a sudden
application of the brakes, came to a sharp stop. Bentley noticed that
they were at the intersection of Twenty-second Street and Fifth
Avenue. The lights were still green, but nevertheless all traffic was
halted.

And for a strange reason.

From the west door of the Flatiron Building emerged a grim apparition
of a man. His body was scored by countless bleeding wounds which
looked as though they had been made by the fingernails of a giant. The
man wore no article of clothing except his shoes. Apparently, his
clothing had been ripped from his body by the same instrument which
had turned his body into a raw, dripping horror.

The man staggered, half-running, at times all but falling, toward the
traffic officer at the intersection.

As he ran he screamed, horrible, babbling screams. His lips worked
crazily, his eyes rolled. He was frightened beyond the comprehension
of ordinary mortals. His screams began and ended on the high shrill
notes of utter dementia, and as he ran he pawed the air with his
bleeding hands as though he fought out on all sides against invisible
demons seeking to drag him down.

"Oh, my God!" said Ellen. "Even here!"

What had caused her to speak the last two words? Did she also have a
premonition of grim disaster? Did she also feel, deep down inside her,
as Bentley did, that the nightmare through which they had passed was
not yet ended?

Bentley now sat unmoving, his eyes unblinking, as he saw the naked man
stagger over to the traffic officer. The color drained from his face.

He looked at his watch. It was exactly noon.

Even without further consideration Bentley knew that this gruesome
apparition had some direct connection with the newspaper story he had
just read.

     -     -     -

Unobtrusively, trying to make it seem a preoccupied action, he folded
the newspaper again and thrust it down at the end of the seat cushion.
But Ellen was watching him, a haunting fear gradually coming into her
eyes.

She quickly reached past him and snatched the paper before he realized
her intent. The item he had read came instantly under her eyes because
of the way he had automatically folded the paper. She read it with
staring eyes.

"So, Lee," she said, "you think there's a connection with--with--well,
with _us_?"

"Absurd!" he said heartily, too heartily. "Caleb Barter is dead."

"But I have never been sure," insisted Ellen. "Oh, Lee, let's get away
from here! Let's take the first boat for Bermuda--anywhere to escape
this terrible fear."

"No!" he retorted harshly. "If our suspicions are correct, and I think
we're unwarrantedly keyed up because of our recent experiences, the
officials of New York may need my help."

"Your help? Why?"

"I know more about Caleb Barter than any other living man, perhaps."

"Then you _do_ have doubts that he is dead!"

Bentley shrugged his shoulders.

"Ellen," he said, "drive on home without me. I'm going to drop off and
find out all I can. If we're in for it in any way it's just as well to
know it at once."

"You'll come right along?"

"Just as soon as I can make it. And I hope I'll be able to report our
fears groundless."

Bentley stepped from the cab. He ordered the chauffeur to turn right
into Twenty-second Street and to proceed until Ellen gave him further
directions.

Then Bentley hurried through the congestion of automobiles toward the
traffic officer who was fighting with the naked man, trying to subdue
him. Other men were running to the officer's assistance, for it could
be seen that he alone was no match for the lunatic. Bentley, however,
was first to arrive.

"Give me a hand!" gasped the officer. "I can't handle 'im without
usin' my club and I don't wanna do that. The poor fella don't know
what he's a-doin'."

     -     -     -

Bentley quickly sprang to the patrolman's assistance. Between them
they soon reduced the stranger to a squirming bundle and dragged him
to the sidewalk; another officer was phoning for an ambulance. The
stricken man was now mumbling, babbling insanely. Blood trickled from
the corners of his lips. The sight of one eye had been destroyed.

Bentley watched him, sprawled now on the sidewalk, surrounded by a
group of men. The man was dying, no question about that. The talons,
which had scored him, had bitten deeply and he was destined to bleed
to death soon even if the wounds were not otherwise mortal.

Bentley noticed something clutched tightly in the man's right
hand--something that sent a chill through his body despite the heat of
a mid-July noon. The officer, apparently, had not noticed it.

Soon a clanging bell announced the arrival of an ambulance, and as the
crowd stepped aside to clear the way, Bentley bent over the dying man.
The man's lips were parted and he was trying with a mighty effort of
will to speak.

Bentley put his ear close to the bleeding lips through which words
strove to bubble. He heard parts of two words:

"...ind ...aster...."

Bentley suddenly knew what the man was trying to say. The half-uttered
words could mean only--"Mind Master."

Bentley suppressed a shudder and extended his hands to the closed
right hand of the dying man. Carefully he removed from between the
fingers three tufts of thick brown hair, coarse and crude of texture.
There was a rattle in the naked man's throat.

Five minutes later the ambulance intern hastily scribbled in his
record the entry, "Dead on Arrival."

Bentley, more frightened than he had ever been before, entered a
taxicab as soon as the body had been removed and the streets cleared.
He stared closely at the tufts of hair in his hand. Maybe he had been
wrong in taking them before detectives arrived on the scene, but he
had to know, and he felt that these hairs proved his mad suspicions.

Caleb Barter was alive!

The hairs came from the shaggy coat of a giant anthropoid ape or a
gorilla.




CHAPTER II

_Ultimatum_


How terribly far-fetched it seemed! It was unbelievable enough that
Bentley had once reposed in the body of an ape. That had been in the
African wilds. But the idiocy of the thing now rested in Bentley's
belief that here, immediately upon landing, he was again facing
something just as horrible.

But the coincidences were too clear. The palaver about "brains," and
"Mind Master"--and those ape hairs in Bentley's hands. He wished he
knew all that had led up to that story he had read in the paper just
prior to the appearance of the naked man from the west door of the
Flatiron Building. However, the killing would get front page position
now, due to the importance of the dead man--Bentley never doubted it
was the man whom, in the paper, the "Mind Master" had promised to
slay.

Great apes in the heart of New York City! It sounded silly,
preposterous. Yet, before he had gone through that dread experience
with the mad Barter, Bentley would have sworn that brain transplantation
was impossible. Even now he was not sure that it hadn't all been a
terrible dream.

Should Bentley go at once to the police to give them the benefit of
whatever knowledge he might have of Caleb Barter? He wasn't sure. Then
he decided that sooner or later he must come out into the open. So he
caught a cab and went to police headquarters.

"I wish," he said, "to talk to someone about the Mind Master!"

If he had said, "I have just come from Mars," he could scarcely have
caused a greater sensation.

     -     -     -

But his calm statement got him an instant audience with a slender man
of thirty-five or so, whose hair was prematurely gray at the temples,
and whose eyes were shrewd and far-seeing.

"My name's Thomas Tyler," said the detective. He certainly didn't look
the conventional detective, but Bentley knew instantly that he
_wasn't_ the conventional detective. "I work on the unusual cases. If
you hadn't sent in your name I wouldn't have seen you, which means
that as soon as you leave here you are to forget my name and how I
look."

He motioned Bentley to a seat. Bentley sat back. Suddenly Thomas Tyler
was around his desk and had pushed back the hair from Bentley's
temples. He drew in his breath with a sharp hiss when he saw the white
line which circled Bentley's skull.

"It's not exactly proof," he said, as though he and Bentley had been
in the midst of a discussion of that awful operation Barter had
performed on Bentley, "but I'd take your word for it."

"The story, in the main, was true," said Bentley.

"I thought so. What made you come here?"

"I saw that naked man run across Fifth Avenue from the door of the
Flatiron Building. I saw the officer subdue him, helped him do it in
fact, and saw the man die. Since there was no detective there, I took
the liberty of removing these from the fingers of the dead man."

Bentley gave Tyler the coarse hair, stained with blood. Tyler looked
at it grimly for a moment or two.

"Not human hair," he said, as though talking to himself. "Not like any
I know of. But ... ah, you know what sort of hair, eh? That's what
sent you here!"

"It's the hair of an ape or a gorilla."

"How do you know, for sure?"

"Once," said Bentley grimly, "for several horrible hours ... I was a
giant anthropoid ape."

     -     -     -

Tyler's chair legs crashed solidly to the floor.

"I see," he said. "You think this thing has some connection with your
own experiences. How long ago was that?"

"Slightly over two months."

"You think the same man...?"

"I don't know. But who could want, as a newspaper story I just read
says, to steal the brains of men? What for? It sounds like Barter.
I've never heard of anybody else with such an obsession. I'm putting
two and two together--and fervently hoping they'll add up to seven
instead of four. For if ever in my life I wanted to be wrong it's
now."

Tyler pursed his lips. Bentley saw that his eyes were glinting with
excitement.

"But there's a possibility you're right. Do you know what the Mind
Master's first manifesto said? It was published by a tabloid newspaper
as a sort of gag--a strange crank letter. Here it is."

Tyler tossed Bentley a newspaper clipping a week old. Bentley read
quickly:

  "The white race is deteriorating physically at a dangerous
  rate. In fifty years, if nothing is done to prevent it,
  the world will be filled with men whose bodies are so soft
  as to be almost worthless. But I shall take steps to
  prevent that, as soon as I am ready. I need a week. Then I
  shall begin my crusade to make the white race a race of
  supermen, whom I alone shall rule. They shall keep the
  brains they have, which shall be transferred to bodies
  which I shall furnish.

                                  (Signed) The Mind Master."

     -     -     -

Tyler squinted at Bentley again.

"You see? Brains are all right, he says, but the white race needs new
bodies. If he isn't suggesting brain substitution, what is he
suggesting? Though I confess I never thought of your story until your
name was sent in to me a while ago. For the world thinks of Barter as
having been killed by the great apes."

"Yes, I told newspaper reporters that. I thought it was true. But this
Mind Master must be Barter. There couldn't be two persons in the world
with mental quirks so much alike."

"Tell me what Barter looks like. Oh, there are plenty of pictures
extant of the famous Professor Caleb Barter who disappeared from the
world some years ago, but he'll know that, of course, and he won't
look like the pictures.

"Alteration of his own features should be easy for a man who juggles
brains."

"He may have changed his features since I saw him, too," said Bentley.
"But I'm sure I'd know him."

Tyler's telephone rang stridently.

He took down the receiver. His mouth fell slackly open as his eyes
lifted to Bentley's face. But he recovered himself and slapped his
hand over the transmitter.

"Anybody know you came here?" asked Tyler.

Bentley shook his head.

"Well," went on Tyler, "I don't know how it happens, but this
telephone message is for you!"

Bentley's heart seemed to jump into his throat. One of those hunches
which sometimes were so valuable to him had struck him, as though it
were a blow between the eyes. His lips tightened. His face was pale,
but there was a grim light in his eyes.

He hesitated for a second, the receiver in his hand, his mouth against
the transmitter.

"Well, Professor Barter?" he said conversationally.

     -     -     -

There came a gasp from Thomas Tyler. He jumped to the door and
motioned to someone. A man in uniform came to his side. Bentley
distinctly heard Tyler tell the man to have this telephone call
traced.

From the receiver came a well-remembered chuckle.

"So you were expecting me, eh, Bentley? You never really believed that
one of my genius would fall such easy prey to the great apes did
you?"

"Of course not, Professor," said Bentley soothingly. "It would be an
insult to your vivid mentality."

"_Vivid_ mentality! _Vivid_ mentality! Why, Bentley, there isn't
another brain in the world to compare with mine. And you of all people
should know it. The whole world will know it before I'm finished, for
I have made tremendous strides since you helped me to perform that
crowning achievement in Africa. By the way, tell your friend Tyler,
who just called the officer to the door, that it's useless to try to
trace this call!"

Bentley jumped as though he had been stung. How had Barter known what
Tyler was doing? How had he guessed what Tyler had told the man in
uniform? How had Barter known Bentley was visiting Tyler? How had he
discovered even that Bentley was back in the United States? Why,
besides, was he so friendly with Bentley now?

"You speak, Professor," said Bentley softly, "as though you could see
right into police headquarters."

"I can, Bentley! I can!" said Barter impatiently, as though he were
rebuking a schoolboy for saying the obvious.

"You're close by, then?"

"No. I'm a long way--several miles--from you. But I can see everything
you do. And you needn't look at Tyler in such surprise!"

     -     -     -

Bentley started. He had looked at Tyler in a surprised way and, clever
though he was, he didn't think that Barter could have _guessed_ so
accurately to the second the gesture he had made. Barter chuckled.

"It's a good jest, isn't it? But listen to me, Bentley, I've a great
scheme in hand for the amelioration of mankind. I need your help,
mostly because you were such an excellent subject in my greatest
successful experiment."

"Will it be the same sort of experiment as the other?" Bentley's heart
was in his mouth as he asked the question.

"Yes, the same ... but there are improvements I have succeeded in
perfecting since the creation of Manape. My one mistake when Manape
was created was in that I allowed myself to lose control of him--of
you! That will not happen again. Oh, if you'll help me, Bentley, that
operation will not be performed on you until you yourself request it
because I shall have proved to you that it is better for you. You
shall be my assistant and obey my orders, nothing more."

Lee Bentley drew a deep breath.

"If I prefer not to work with you again, Professor?"

A chuckle was Barter's answer. The chuckle broke off shortly.

"You should not refuse, Bentley," said the scientist at last. "For
then I should find it necessary to remove you. You might stand in my
way, and though you would be but a puny obstacle, you still would be
an obstacle. For example, consider Ellen Estabrook, your fiancée. I
can find no use for her ... and she knows as much about me as you do.
Therefore, at my convenience, I shall remove her."

     -     -     -

"Caleb Barter," Bentley's voice was hoarse with anger as he dropped
his soothing mode of address toward the man he knew was insane, "if
anything happens to Miss Estabrook through you I shall find you no
matter how well you are guarded ... and I shall destroy you bit by
bit, as a small boy destroys a fly. For every least evil thing that
happens to Miss Estabrook, a hundred times that will happen to you at
my hands."

"Good!" snapped Barter, no longer chuckling. "I am happy to know how
much she means to you. It shows me how easily I may control you
through her. It means war then, between us? I'm sorry, Bentley, for I
like you. In a way, you know, you are my creation. But in a war
between us, Bentley, you haven't a chance to win."

Bentley clicked up the receiver.

"Could you trace the call, Tyler?" he snapped.

Tyler shook his head ruefully.

"We couldn't locate the right telephone, but we could tell which
exchange it came through, and the lines of that exchange cover a huge
section of the city."

"Can you find out exactly the section and the address of each phone on
every line?"

"Yes. The exchange is Stuyvesant."

"That gives me some help. I used to live in Greenwich Village and I
had a Stuyvesant number. I'm going after Barter. Say, Tyler, how do
you suppose Barter knew exactly what was going on in this room?"

Tyler's face slowly whitened as his eyes looked fearfully into the
eyes of Lee Bentley. He shook his head slowly.

Bentley squared his shoulders and spoke quietly and determinedly.

"Mr. Tyler," he said, "I am in a great hurry. May I be conducted in a
police car? Might as well. I'll be working with you hand and glove
until Barter is captured."

Bentley rode behind a shrieking siren to the home of the Estabrooks
... while from a distance of two miles Caleb Barter watched every
move and chuckled grimly to himself.




CHAPTER III

_Hell's Laboratory_


The huge room was absolutely free of all sounds from anywhere save
within itself. The walls, the floors, the doors were of chrome steel.
The cages were iron-ribbed and ponderous.

The long table which ran down the strange room's center was covered
with retorts, test tubes, Bunsen burners--all of the stock-in-trade of
the scientist who spends most of his time at research work. The man
who bent over the table was well past middle age. His hair was
snow-white, but his cheeks were like rosy red apples. He literally
seemed to glow with health. He was like a strange flame. His hands
were slender, the fingers long and extraordinarily supple. His lips
were redder even than his cheeks, and made one, strangely enough,
think of vampires. His eyes were coal-black, fathomless, piercing.

On the bronze wall directly across the table from the swiftly laboring
man was a porcelain tablet set into the bronze, and in the midst of
the table were a score of little push-buttons. Above each was a red
light; and below, a green one.

Several inches below each green light was a little slot which
resembled a tiny keyhole, something like the keyhole in the average
handbag. There was a key in each hole, and from each key hung a length
of gleaming chain which shone like gold and might have been gold, or
at least, some gold-plated metal. On the dangling end of each chain
was another key which might have been the twin of the key in the hole
above.

In the space between the keyholes and the green lights there were the
letters and figures: A-1, B-2, C-3, D-4 ... and so on up to T-20.

Plainly it was the beginning of a complicated classification system
with any number of combinations possible.

     -     -     -

Behind the working man the row of cages partially hid the brooding
horror of the place. There were twenty cages--and in each one was a
sulking, red-eyed anthropoid ape. Plainly the fact that the number of
apes coincided with the number of push-buttons, and with the number of
keys, to say nothing of the red lights and the green lights, was no
accident. The apes were sullenly silent, proof that they feared the
man at the table so much that they were afraid to move.

At last the white-haired man stopped and breathed a sigh of
satisfaction. Carefully he placed in the middle of the table the
instrument which he had been examining. It looked like a slightly
concave aluminum plate or tympanum, save that on the apex appeared a
tiny ball of the same metal. Except for the color and the fact that
the thing was almost flat, it looked like a small Manchu hat.

"Naka Machi!" said the man suddenly in a conversational tone of
voice.

The chrome steel door swung open swiftly and silently and another man
entered. He was about the same height as the first man, but he was
younger and his eyes were blacker. His hair was as black as the wings
of a crow. He was a Japanese dressed in Occidental garb.

"Naka Machi," said the white-haired one again, "I have examined every
bit of the infinitesimal mechanism in the ball on this tympanum. It is
perfect. You are a genius, Naka Machi. There is only one genius
greater--Professor Caleb Barter!"

Naka Machi bowed low, and as he spoke his breath hissed inwardly through
his teeth after the Japanese manner of admitting humility--"that my
humble breath may not blow upon you"--which never needed really to
be sincere.

"I am merely a genius with my fingers, Professor Barter," said Naka
Machi in a musical voice. "The smaller the medium in which I work the
happier I am, Professor; and in that I am a genius. But the plan for
this so marvelous little radio-control, as you call it, came entirely
from your head, my master. I did exactly as the plans bade me. Will it
work?"

     -     -     -

Caleb Barter's red face went redder still. His eyes shot flames of
anger. His lips pouched. Almost he seemed on the point of striking
down his Japanese assistant.

"Will it work?" he repeated. "Have you not just told me that you
followed my plans exactly? Have I not just now checked your every bit
of work and pronounced it perfect? Then how can it fail to work? Have
you another one ready?"

"Yes, my master. Now that I have perfected two, the work will become
monotonous. If the master wishes, I can create still another
radio-control, inside the head of a pin, which I should first render
hollow with that skill which only Naka Machi possesses?"

Caleb Barter almost smiled.

"It will not be necessary. But it will be necessary for you to make
eighteen additional radio-controls of the same size as this one, or
say make twenty-four so that we shall have some extra ones in case of
accident. These two will be put into action at once. Naka Machi, bring
me Lecky, completely uniformed as a smart chauffeur! Have you laid in
a store of clothing, as I bade you, to fit every conceivable need of
Lecky, Stanley, Morton and Cleve?"

"Yes, my master."

"Then bring in Lecky accoutered as a chauffeur."

Ten minutes later a young man entered behind Naka Machi. He was
slender and his chauffeur's uniform fitted him like a glove. He looked
like a soldier in it. Indeed his bearing, his whole stance, spoke of
many years as a soldier--and a proud one. The fellow was brimful of
health. His cheeks were rosy with vitality. He looked like a man with
health so abundant he never found means to tire himself to the point
where he could sleep dreamlessly.

But, nevertheless his arms hung listlessly at his sides. His eyes
seemed empty of hope, dull and lifeless, and one looked into those
eyes and shuddered. One tried to gaze deeply into them and found
oneself baffled. There was no soul behind them.

"Come here, Lecky," said Barter coldly.

     -     -     -

Lecky glided effortlessly forward to stand before Barter.

"You've no brains, Lecky," said Barter emotionlessly; "no brains of
your own. You have a splendid body which moves only at the will of
Caleb Barter. I need that body for my purposes. But a man with brains
is dangerous. That's why you haven't any."

Barter now took the silvery tympanum with the ball atop it and set it
on the head of Lecky. On top of it he placed the chauffeur's cap,
bringing it down tightly to keep the tympanum in place.

"If I had it to do again I'd insert the tympanum under the skull as
part of the operation, Naka Machi," said Barter as he worked. "We'll
do that hereafter. And we begin work immediately. I'm going to send
Lecky out now to get the first subject."

"The first subject, sir?"

"Yes. Manhattan's richest man. A man must have brains to become
Manhattan's richest man, and I need men with brains. His name is
Harold Hervey. He will be leaving his office in the Empire State
Building in about half an hour. I want Lecky to be on hand to meet
him."

On his own head Barter placed a second tympanum which Naka Machi had
brought him. Over it he pulled a rubber cap, like a bathing cap with a
hole cut in the top.

"Now, we'll try it out, Naka Machi," said Barter. "Which one of these
lights is Lecky's?"

"B-2, my master."

Barter sat down under the light marked "B-2" and lifted the key which
dangled from the end of the golden chain. This key he inserted in a
tiny orifice in the ball atop his head. Then he turned in his chair to
look at Lecky. Barter's face was a mask of concentration as he gazed
intently at the young man.

     -     -     -

Lecky stiffened to attention. His right hand shot to his cap visor in
salute. His lips twisted into a travesty of a smile. For a few seconds
he went through a strange series of posturings. He stood in the
attitude of a boxer preparing to attack. He danced smartly on his
toes. He bent double and touched the floor with the palms of his
hands. He jumped up and down with his legs stiff. He stopped suddenly
with his right hand at rigid salute. But his eyes were still vacant
through every posture.

Barter's face showed a glow of satisfaction.

"He did exactly what I willed him to do! I am his master. He is my
slave--even more abjectly than you are my slave, Naka Machi!"

"But that would be impossible, my master," said Naka Machi, hissing
again through his teeth as he sucked in his breath. "None could be
more abjectly your slave than I."

"Do not say anything is impossible," said Barter peevishly, "when I
say otherwise. Anything is possible to me! Now, we'll send Lecky
forth. I'll watch him through the heliotubes and control his every
move. While I am directing Lecky you will prepare the table behind me
for the first of our world-revolutionizing operations."

"Yes, my master," said the Japanese humbly.

"But first, it's just as well that Lecky is in a good humor, even
though he is my slave. Where are the walnuts, Naka Machi?"

The Japanese tendered a large walnut to Barter. Barter rose and
approached Lecky who still stood at salute. He stopped a couple of
paces in front of the soldierly man and held up the walnut as a man
sometimes holds up food to a dog, bidding him "speak" before he may be
fed.

     -     -     -

Then Lecky did a strange thing.

He began to jump up and down like a pleased child. His jumping caused
him to lose his balance, but he recaptured it by pressing the backs of
his hands against the floor. His hitherto expressionless eyes lost
their dullness. Saliva dribbled at the corners of his mouth. Barter
tossed him the walnut. Lecky held it under his right forefinger,
against the _heel_ of his thumb, instead of between thumb and
forefinger, as he lifted it to his mouth.

Barter chuckled.

"Even the human casement cannot wholly hide the ape, eh, Naka Machi?"
said Barter.

Naka Machi hissed.

Barter returned to the porcelain slab banked with the lights and the
keys. He readjusted the keys and his face became thoughtful again.

Lecky turned smartly, still nibbling at his walnut, strode to the
bronze door and let himself out.

Through the heliotube directly above the key marked "B-2," Caleb
Barter watched him go, and kept watching him as he made his way to the
street. Barter looked ahead of his puppet, noting the cars which were
parked at the curb. He saw a stately limousine. He grinned. The
chauffeur was not in sight. Barter looked for him and found him at a
table in a nearby restaurant, his back to the window.

Barter looked back at his puppet and his face became serious with
concentration.

Lecky walked blithely along the street and turned right when he was
opposite the limousine. Without a moment's hesitation, he stepped into
the limousine, pressed the starter, shifted gears, turned in the
middle of the block and started swiftly uptown.

After Lecky had shifted gears he drove with his left hand alone. His
right was still busy with the walnut.

Barter now looked like a man in a trance, so deeply did he concentrate
on his task of guiding his soulless, ape-brained puppet, Lecky,
through the heavy traffic of Manhattan.




CHAPTER IV

_The Opening Gun_


"That list, Tyler," said Bentley, after he had somewhat calmed the
fears of Ellen Estabrook and had returned to the task of tracing
Barter, "is headed by Harold Hervey, the multi-millionaire. I know
Barter well enough to know that he'll go down the list methodically,
taking each person in turn. We'd best take immediate precautions to
guard the old man's home. For Barter, if not entirely ready to take
drastic steps, must be almost ready, else he couldn't issue his
manifestoes and take a chance of some slip-up before he could get
really started."

"Why do you suppose he named Hervey on the list?" asked Tyler.

"Because Hervey is a financial genius. Barter wishes not only to carry
out his plan of creating a race of supermen, but wishes at the same
time to maintain personal control of them. And to control Manhattan,
from which he logically hopes to extend his control to the whole
United States, then to the whole world, Barter must also control the
money marts. Hervey is the shrewdest financier in the world."

"But won't we frighten Hervey's family if we take steps now?"

"Better to frighten them now than to be too late entirely. However, we
can place his house under surveillance without the knowledge of the
family for the time being. And you'd better send a couple of men to
his office in the Empire State Building to see that nothing happens
to him on the way home this evening. I talked to him by telephone and
he pooh-poohed the whole thing. Hard-headed business executives have
no imagination."

Bentley and Tyler rode uptown in the back seat of a speeding police
car driven by one of the best chauffeurs Bentley had ever ridden
behind. He edged through holes in the traffic where Bentley could
scarcely see any holes at all. He estimated the speed of cars which
might have collided with the police vehicle and slipped through with
inches to spare. In his way the man was a genius. But Bentley was yet
to see the driving of a master genius....

     -     -     -

Far out in the residential district the police car came to a
stop. Other police cars arrived at intervals to disgorge men in
plain clothes who immediately entered upon their guard duties as
unobtrusively as possible. If Hervey's family noticed at all they
would scarcely attach any importance to the arrival of cars and the
discharging of passengers who seemed to have nothing to do except
dawdle on the sidewalks.

But all the way uptown a hunch had ridden Bentley. He had the feeling
that no matter how fast the police car traveled, no matter how
skilfully the chauffeur inched his way through the press, they would
be too late to save Hervey. The feeling became an obsession. Many
times he called through the speaking tube.

"Faster, driver, for God's sake, faster!"

Now near the home of Harold Hervey, Bentley found himself unable to
walk slowly, with the air of nonchalance, which the other police
officers wore like a cloak.

"Something's happened," said Bentley, "I'm sure of it. I feel that
Barter is so close to me that I could touch him if I knew in which
direction to extend my fingers."

Suddenly a speeding car, with horn bellowing, came crashing up the
street toward the Hervey residence. It was traveling at great speed,
careening from side to side like a ship in a storm at sea.

"There comes Hervey's car," said Tyler. "And something has happened to
make him travel like that. Old man Hervey doesn't allow his chauffeur
to go faster than twenty miles an hour."

     -     -     -

Tyler and Bentley were near by when the car squealed to a stop before
the Hervey residence and a hatless, disheveled man leaped out almost
before the car stopped rolling.

"That's not Hervey," said Tyler. "That's his private secretary.
Something's up. It's time we took a hand in things."

Tyler and Bentley grasped the young man by the elbow.

"What's up?" demanded Tyler.

"It's Mr. Hervey, sir," panted the secretary. "It just happened. He's
been kidnaped!"

The secretary was a slight man, but fear had given him strength. He
almost dragged Tyler and Bentley off their feet as he strode on up the
walk leading to the home of Hervey.

"You'll scare his family half to death!" said Tyler.

"It'll have to come sometime, Tyler," said Bentley. "It might as well
be now. They'll have to know. We'll have to sit inactively from this
moment on. Tyler, there's nothing that can be done for Hervey. Barter
has scored. We couldn't catch him now to save ourselves from
perdition. But his next step will involve the Hervey menage. We'll
have to wait there for his next move."

Tyler and Bentley entered the vast gloomy structure of the
old-fashioned Hervey domicile on the heels of the frightened
secretary. Mrs. Hervey, a faded woman of sixty or so, met them at the
door. Her head was held high, her lips grimly drawn into a straight
line.

"So," she said evenly, "they've got Mr. Hervey. I begged him to take
those threats seriously. He's been either killed or kidnaped."

"Kidnaped," said Bentley, continuing brutally because of the courage
he saw in the old woman's face. "And that means he'll be dead within
the hour, if he isn't dead already. We've got to stay here for a few
hours, to await the next move of the madman calling himself the Mind
Master, in the hope that we can trace him when he makes his next
move."

Mrs. Hervey lifted her head still higher.

"We'll place no obstacles in your path, gentlemen," she said, "if you
are from the police. The family will confine itself to the upper
floors of the house."

     -     -     -

Tyler and Bentley took possession of the living room. Outside a dozen
plain-clothes men were to patrol the grounds during the hours of
darkness.

Other men were at every adjacent street corner. A rat could not have
got through unobserved.

Tyler and Bentley took seats at a table facing the door. The police
car in which they had arrived stood at the curb, with the chauffeur at
the wheel, the motor humming softly.

"Timkins," said Bentley, addressing the private secretary who stood in
the most distant corner of the room, his eyes fearfully fixed on the
street door, "how was Mr. Hervey captured?"

"I was accompanying him to his car, sir," replied the young man, "when
a dapper fellow in a chauffeur's uniform confronted us on the
sidewalk. He stood as stiff and straight as a soldier. He didn't say a
word. He just looked at Mr. Hervey. Mr. Hervey stopped because the man
was blocking the sidewalk. I looked into the chauffeur's eyes. They
seemed utterly dead. I shivered. I'd have sworn the man had no soul,
now that I look back at it. Suddenly he lashed out with his fist,
striking Mr. Hervey on the jaw. Mr. Hervey started to fall. The man
caught him under the arms and tossed him into the tonneau of a
limousine at the curb. The car was away before I could summon the
police."

Bentley nodded.

"Which way did the car go?" he demanded.

"Downtown, at top speed," replied Timkins.

Bentley turned to Tyler.

"The Stuyvesant exchange is downtown," he said. "Now Timkins says that
the kidnaper's car went downtown. And the naked man was killed in the
Flatiron Building, which is well downtown in its turn. Tyler, fill all
the area covered by the Stuyvesant exchange with plain-clothes men.
Telephone Headquarters to see whether a stolen limousine has been
reported from somewhere in the area. Barter wouldn't have cars of his
own for fear they could be traced. He'll use stolen cars when he uses
cars at all. And he had his puppet pick up the limousine close to his
hideout."

     -     -     -

Tyler nodded and quickly spoke into the telephone on the table at his
elbow.

The telephone reminded Bentley of Ellen Estabrook.

When Tyler had finished issuing pointed instructions Bentley called
the residence of the Estabrooks in Astoria, Long Island.

Carl Estabrook answered the telephone.

"Is Ellen all right?" asked Bentley. "May I speak to her?"

Carl Estabrook's answering gasp came plainly over the wire.

"Are you crazy, Lee?" he asked. "Not ten minutes ago you telephoned
Ellen and told her to meet you near the arch in Washington Square. I
asked her if she was sure the voice was yours, and she was...."

But Bentley, white-faced, had already clicked up the receiver.

"Tyler," he said, "Ellen Estabrook, my fiancée, is walking into a
trap. It's Barter again. He'd know how to imitate my voice well enough
to fool Ellen. It would be simple enough for a man like him. He
probably had that long conversation with me at headquarters to make
sure he hadn't forgotten the timbre and pitch of my voice ... and to
hear how it sounded over the telephone. Please have plain-clothes men
pick up Ellen in Washington Square. And that, Tyler, if you'll notice,
is also downtown."

Bentley felt that he would go mad with anxiety as he awaited some news
from the plain-clothes men Tyler had ordered to look for Ellen
Estabrook.

He had asked Tyler to issue rather unusual instructions to the
plain-clothes men around the Hervey residence. They were to make no
attempt to halt anyone who might approach the house, but were to
permit no one to depart. It was a weak plan, but knowing the supreme
egotism of Barter, Bentley felt that the old scientist would
deliberately accept such a challenge. He wouldn't mind risking the
loss of a minion.

     -     -     -

"He controls his puppets from his hideout, Tyler," Bentley explained,
"and won't hesitate to send them into danger since it can't touch him.
And he watches every move they make, too. He's made some television
adaptation of his own. I'll wager, if he so desires, he can see us
sitting here right now, even perhaps hear what we say. I can fancy
hearing him chuckle, and Tyler...?"

"Yes?"

"I can see old man Hervey on an operating table with Barter bending
over him, working fiendishly. Behind Barter are cages of apes."

"But how could he transport apes to his hideout?"

"He could manage to smuggle anything anywhere. Money paves the way to
any accomplishment, Tyler. We needn't concern ourselves with how he
does it, but with the fact that he must surely have apes in his
hideout."

There came suddenly an imperious ringing of the doorbell.

Bentley and Tyler leaped to their feet, their hands streaking for
their automatics which they had placed within easy reach on the table.
Side by side they sprang for the door, and flung it open.

A chill of horror ran through Bentley.

"Mother of God!" cried Tyler.

"Mr. Hervey!" shrieked Timkins. The secretary, noting the figure which
toppled so grimly into the room, fainted. The thud of his body
followed the thud of the old man's body to the floor.

In that first moment of overwhelming terror, all three men noted that
Hervey's skull-pan was missing.

"Look after details here, Tyler!" cried Bentley, quickly recovering
himself. "I'm after whoever brought the old man home."

Bentley was racing down the path for the street, where a man in
chauffeur's uniform was hurling himself into a limousine, while
bullets from half a dozen plain-clothes men, racing to head him off,
sang about his ears. But the stranger gained the driver's seat and
the limousine was away like a shot. The police car was rolling as
Bentley leaped upon the running board, then eased in beside the
driver.

"Don't stop for anything!" cried Bentley. "Keep that car in sight!"

The car headed downtown at breakneck speed.




CHAPTER V

_To Broadway's Horror_


Bentley would never forget that nightmarish ride downtown. It was a
dream as terrifying and ghastly as had been his experience in the
African jungles when he had been Manape. Added to the utter fear of
the ride was his fear for the safety of Ellen Estabrook. Caleb Barter,
so far, was utterly invincible. It seemed he could not be beaten or
outwitted in any way. But Bentley set his lips tightly.

Caleb Barter must have some weak spot in his insane armor, some way by
which he could be reached and destroyed--and Bentley swore to himself
that it would be he who would find that weak spot.

The limousine ahead was going at dangerous speed. The police chauffeur
beside Bentley crouched low over the wheel as he drove. His eyes never
left the speeding limousine. People on the sidewalks stared in
astonishment as the two cars flashed downtown.

The leading car sped on, the driver obviously expecting ways to open
in the last second before threatened collision. He passed cars on the
left and the right. There were times when his wheels were up on the
curb as he went through lanes between cars and sidewalks. He was
determined to go through.

Only Bentley understood that the driver ahead was an automaton, a man
whose brain did not know the meaning of fear. He knew that from his
hideout Caleb Barter was directing the flight of the escaping car. He
could fancy the old man of the apple-red cheeks, sitting in a chair in
his hideout, his hands in the air as though they gripped the wheel of
a car, sweat breaking forth on his cheeks as he guided his puppet
through the press of cars.

But by now in that uncanny way that sometimes happens the streets were
being cleared as if by magic before the flight of one whom all
observers must have thought a madman. Only Bentley knew that the
driver ahead was not a madman.

     -     -     -

His own car careened from side to side. Bentley wondered what the
chauffeur would think if he knew he was driving a race against one of
Barter's supermen. He would perhaps have realized that no man could
possibly follow with any degree of success. The police driver had
succeeded so far only because, Bentley guessed, he felt that where any
other man could drive, so could he.

Only Bentley knew that the driver up there was not a "man" in the
normal meaning of the word. He wondered who "he" really was--not that
it mattered greatly, for the entity required to make "him" a normal
man had perhaps been destroyed, or had become part of some giant
anthropoid to be used later in Barter's ghastly experiments.

"I wonder if Tyler will send out calls for police cars in other parts
of the city to try and cut off the runaway," shouted Bentley above the
shrieking of the motor and the wailing of the siren. "Are any police
cars equipped with radio?"

"Several," answered the police chauffeur. "And they are able to cut in
on various public radio stations, too. By this time warnings are being
heard on every blaring radio in Manhattan."

The two cars sped on. For a brief space the car ahead took to the
sidewalk. Suddenly a human body was tossed violently against the side
of a building, and the fleeing car passed on. As the pursuing car
passed the spot Bentley knew by the shape of the bundle that the enemy
had killed a woman. At that speed he must have crushed every bone in
her body. In a matter of seconds the information would be telephoned
to radio studios and people would be warned to take to open doorways
when they saw cars traveling at undue rates of speed.

"I'm a better driver than he is!" yelled the police chauffeur, out of
the side of his mouth at Bentley. "I haven't killed anyone yet."

The words had scarcely left his mouth when a blind man, tapping his
way with a cane, came from behind a building at an intersection and
stepped into the gutter. The fool, couldn't he hear the shrieking of
the siren? But perhaps he was deaf, too.

     -     -     -

The police chauffeur turned sharply to the left and for a second
Bentley held his breath expecting the careening car to turn over. If
it did it would roll over a dozen times, and destroy anything that
happened to be in its path. But with a superhuman manipulation of the
wheel the police chauffeur righted the car, got it straightened out
again, and was on his way. The old man had not been touched, but there
was no doubt that he had felt the wind of the great car's passing.

The fleeing car was gaining now.

It rode madly down Broadway. The great pillared intersection where
Broadway cuts through Sixth Avenue was dead ahead. The fleeing car
continued on, crashing through, while cars evaded it in every
direction, and into Broadway beyond. After it went Bentley, all other
matters forgotten as he prayed to the god of speed to guide them
through.

Two cars came out of Thirty-first Street. Their drivers saw their
danger at the same time. But they turned different ways, and as
Bentley's car flashed past them the two cars seemed welded solidly
together. They were rolling across the sidewalk toward the huge plate
glass window of a restaurant. Just as the pursuing car lost them as
they swept past, the two cars went through that plate glass window.
Bentley, in his mind's eye, saw the two dead, mutilated drivers, and
the passengers with them, he saw the wreckage of the restaurant, the
mangled diners who sat at the tables nearest the fatal window.

"More marks against Barter," he muttered to himself. "How long will
the list be before I'll be able to drag him down?"

     -     -     -

On and on went the two cars. People packed the sidewalks, but they
kept close against the buildings. The streets were almost deserted
now, for that warning had got ahead. Three other police cars were
careening down the street, too. Bentley saw them with pleasure. Other
cars would be coming in to head off the fleeing limousine. This one
puppet of Barter's, at least, would be pocketed before he could find
time to leap from his car and escape.

"Barter's sweating blood as he saws with both hands at an imaginary
driver's wheel," thought Bentley. "When will he give up--and what will
his driver do when Barter relinquishes control?"

For the first time the grim thought came to him. He knew that the
creature there had the brain of an ape. What would an ape do if he
suddenly found himself at the wheel of a car going down Broadway at
eighty miles an hour? He would chatter, and jump up and down. The
plunging car, with accelerator full on, would be out of control.

"God Almighty, I never thought of that!" yelled Bentley. "As soon as
he sees he can't save his puppet he'll let him get out the best way he
can, himself ... and that car will be traveling, uncontrolled, at
eighty miles an hour."

As though his very statement had fathered the thought, two police cars
swept into the intersection at Twenty-third Street and Fifth Avenue.
The fleeing limousine was turning right to go down Fifth Avenue.

The police cars were brought to a halt to effectively stop the further
progress of the speeding limousine. Three other cars plunged in to
make the box barrage of cars effective. The fleeing car was trapped.
Barter must know that. If he did know, it proved that he could see
everything that transpired. The next few seconds would show.

     -     -     -

Bentley gasped as he put his hand on the driver's arm to have him slow
down to prevent a wholesale pile-up in the busy intersection. He
gasped with horror as he did so, for the fleeing car was now going
crazy. It zigzagged from side to side. Now it rode the two right
wheels, now the two left.

And suddenly the driver swung nimbly out through the left window, his
hands reaching up over the top, and in a moment he was on the roof of
the careening car.

"I've seen apes swing into trees like that," Bentley thought.

While the car plunged on, the creature stood up on the doomed
limousine, and in spite of the fact that the wind of the car's
passing must have been terrific, the ghastly hybrid jumped up and
down on the top like a delighted child viewing a new toy or riding a
shoot-the-chutes.

Suddenly the creature's right leg went through the top's fabric. It
struggled to regain its footing as an ape might struggle to regain
position on a limb in the jungles.

At that moment the fleeing car crashed mercilessly into the two
nearest police cars ahead. The men inside had expected the driver to
slow down to avoid a collision. How could they know what sort of brain
lurked within the driver's skull? They couldn't ... and three
policemen paid with their lives for their lack of knowledge as their
bodies were hurled beneath a mass of twisted wreckage, crushed out of
human semblance.

     -     -     -

The hybrid atop the fatal car was hurled through the air like a
thunderbolt. His body passed over the railing of the subway entrance
before the Flatiron Building and Bentley knew he had crashed to his
death on the steps.

The police car had already come to a stop, and Bentley was running
toward the subway entrance.

The shapeless bleeding bundle on the steps no longer even resembled a
man. Fortunately nobody had been struck by the hurtling body; and,
miraculously enough, Barter's pawn was not yet quite dead.

Moans of animal pain came through his bleeding lips. The eyes scarcely
noticed Bentley, though there was a slight flicker of fear in them.
Then, in the instant of death, even that slight expression passed from
them. Bentley saw the scarline about the skull.

And now Bentley knew that Barter was missing no slightest move, that
he saw everything....

For the ghastly hybrid on the steps raised his right hand in
meticulous salute ... and died. It was an ironic, grotesque gesture.

Plain-clothes men gathered around.

"Take his fingerprints," said Bentley quickly. "Then telegraph the
fingerprint section, U. S. Army, at Washington, for this man's
identity."

An ambulance was taking aboard the three mangled policemen as Bentley
stepped back into his car for the ride down to Washington Square to
see what dread thing had happened to Ellen Estabrook.




CHAPTER VI

_High Jeopardy_


Ellen Estabrook was almost in hysterics when Bentley reached her. She
had been immediately picked up by plain-clothes men and had thought
herself captured by minions of Barter. She had been panic-stricken for
a moment, she told Bentley, and it had taken her some little time to
be persuaded that she was in the hands of police.

But Bentley's heart was filled to overflowing with gratitude that he
had been able to safeguard Ellen against Barter. He never doubted it
had been Barter who had telephoned her. And even now he fancied he
could hear Barter's chuckle of amusement. Barter was watching, perhaps
even listening. Bentley felt that the madman was just biding his time.
Barter could have taken Ellen in this attempt, but hadn't tried
greatly, knowing himself invincible, knowing that he could take her at
any moment if it was necessary. And he might take her even if it were
not necessary, since he had warned Bentley she must be removed.

The police car raced back uptown so that Bentley could inform himself
of any new developments in the Hervey case. Ellen snuggled against him
gratefully. "You'll have to stick close to me," said Bentley, "until
something happens, or until the exigencies of service draw me away
from you. Then it will be up to Tom Tyler to look after you."

"I can look after myself," she retorted spiritedly. "I'm over age and
not without brains...."

"Yet you went to Washington Square," said Bentley gently. "Didn't it
even seem strange to you that I would have selected such a place as a
rendezvous?"

     -     -     -

Ellen turned away from him and her lips trembled. His gentle thrust
had hurt her.

"But I would have sworn it was your voice, Lee," she said. "And--I
still think it was!"

"I tell you I didn't phone you to meet me in Washington Square!"

"But you told me you had talked with Barter for a long time on the
headquarters phone, didn't you? Remember that you are dealing with the
cleverest and maddest brain we know of to-day. What if he had merely
talked with you to get a record of your voice? Suppose a voice were
composed of certain ingredients, certain sounds. Suppose those
ingredients could somehow be captured on a sensitized plate of some
kind! Edison would have been burned as a sorcerer a few centuries
before he invented the wax record. Twenty years ago who would have
thought of talking pictures ... voices permanently recorded on
celluloid?"

"But the talkie films merely parrot, over and over again, the words of
actual people. When I talked with Barter this morning I certainly said
nothing about meeting you at Washington Square."

"But the tone, the timber, the frequency of your voice! Lee, suppose
he had gone a step further than the talkies and had found a way to
break the voice apart and put it back together to suit himself...?"

"Good Lord, Ellen! It sounds crazy ... but if you would have sworn
that voice was mine, then mine it may have been, speaking words with
my voice that I never spoke personally. But wait until we find out for
sure. We're just guessing."

But the idea stuck in his mind and he believed in it enough to tell
Tyler, upon arriving at the Hervey residence, to warn every man named
on the list of the Mind Master to make no appointments over the
telephone, no matter how sure they were of the voices at the other end
of the wire.

It sounded wild, but was it?

     -     -     -

That night Ellen and Bentley occupied rooms which faced each other
across the hall in a midtown hotel, and plain-clothes men were on duty
to right and left in the hall. There were men on the roof and in the
lobby, in the garage, everywhere skulkers might be expected to look
for coigns of vantage from which to proceed against Ellen Estabrook.
Bentley knew quite well that Barter would not drop his intention
against Ellen, especially since he had failed once already.

Tyler and Bentley sat in Bentley's room drinking black coffee and
discussing their plans for the next day. The latest paper had
contained another manifesto of the Mind Master! the second man on his
list was to be taken at ten o'clock the next day. The man was
president of a great construction company. His name was Saret Balisle;
he was under thirty, slim as a professional dancer, and dark as a
gypsy.

"But what does Barter want with all these big shots?" asked Thomas
Tyler. "Just what is the point of his stealing their brains and
putting them into the skull-pans of apes, if that's what you think he
has in mind?"

"The Barter touch," said Bentley grimly. "At first he probably
intended to kill just any men and make the transfer, and then use his
manapes to send against the men he wished to capture, and through whom
he intended to gain control of Manhattan. Then he decided, since he
had learned to control his manapes, by radio I suppose, that it would
be an ironic touch to make virtual slaves of the "key" men he had
chosen for his crusade."

"But why the transplantation at all, even if the man is mad? He
reasons logically. Only his premises are unthinkable ... and he builds
successful ghastly experiments on top of them...."

     -     -     -

"He claims he wishes to build a race of supermen," Bentley answered.
"His reason for the brain transference is therefore plain. An
anthropoid ape has a body which is several times as hardy, durable and
mighty as that of even the strongest man, but the ape has not the
brain of a civilized man. A specialized man, one with a highly
developed brain, generally has a very weak body. He's constantly put
to the necessity of taking exercise to keep from growing sick.
Therefore the ape's body and the man's brain would seem, to Barter, an
ideal combination. That nature didn't plan it so troubles him not at
all. He will make a fool of nature!"

"I wonder if we'll get him. Nobody knows how many lives have been lost
already."

"We'll get him, Tyler. I'll bet anything you want to name that your
men have walked back and forth across his hideout. I'll bet that
decent, respectable people live within mere yards of him and do
not know it. We'll get to him the second he makes a mistake of any
kind. Maybe he'll make his first one when he tries to get Saret
Balisle--Good Lord, I forgot something. Tyler, phone again and ask
Headquarters if the coroner found anything strange about the head of
the men I chased down Fifth Avenue."

Tyler phoned.

"Yes," he said, clicking up the receiver, "he had bits of metal which
looked like aluminum in his scalp; but the autopsy shows that it came
from outside somewhere."

"It's part of Barter's radio control," muttered Bentley, "it _must_
be! It has to be ... and I didn't think of looking for it at the
time."

     -     -     -

Long before sunrise Bentley and Tyler repaired to the office of Saret
Balisle, letting themselves in with keys which had been furnished them
last night. It had been decided that Balisle would not try to run away
from the threat of the Mind Master, but would be in his office as
usual. If he ran, and got out of touch with the police, Barter would
get him anyway and nobody would be the wiser.

Balisle had grinned and shrugged his shoulders, but the wanness in his
cheeks showed that he didn't take the threats lightly, considering
what it was thought had happened to Harold Hervey.

"I wonder," said Tyler as they walked through the cool of the morning
to the Clinton Building on lower Fifth Avenue, where Balisle had his
offices, "how Barter keeps his apes with men's brains from trying to
break away from him when he has to divert his mental control to other
channels?"

Bentley hesitated, seeking a logical answer. It seemed simple enough
when the answer came to his mind.

"Suppose, Tyler," he said, "that you wakened from a nightmare and
looked into a mirror to discover that you were an anthropoid ape? That
you were incapable of speaking, of using your hands save in the
clumsiest fashion? When it came home to you what had happened to you,
would you rush right out into the street, hoping that the people on
the sidewalks would understand that you were a man in ape's
clothing?"

"Good Lord! I never thought of that!"

"You would if you'd ever been an ape. I know the feeling."

"Then Barter's manapes are more surely prisoners than if they were
sentenced to serve their entire lives in the deepest solitary cells in
Sing Sing! How horrible--but still, they yet would have a way of
escape."

"Yes, simply break out and start running, knowing that the crowd would
soon take and destroy them. Right enough--but even when one knows
oneself an ape it isn't easy to destroy oneself."

     -     -     -

They entered the offices of Saret Balisle and looked about them. It
was just an ordinary office. They looked in clothes closets and in
shadowy corners. They took every possible precaution in their survey
of the situation. They looked for hidden instruments of destruction.
They looked for hidden dictaphones. They were extremely thorough in
their preliminary preparations for the defense of Saret Balisle.

At five minutes of ten o'clock Balisle was at his desk, pale of face,
but grinning confidently.

There were men in uniform in the hallways, on the roof, in the windows
of rooms across the avenue. Bentley and Tyler should have felt sure
that not even a mouse could have broken through the cordon to reach
Saret Balisle. But Bentley was doubtful.

He went to the window nearest Balisle and looked out. Sixteen stories
down was Fifth Avenue, patrolled in this block by a dozen blue-coats
and as many more plain-clothes men. Saret Balisle seemed to be
impregnable.

But at ten o'clock exactly, a blood-curdling scream came from the room
adjoining Balisle's, where some insurance company had offices. The
scream was followed by other screams--all the screams of women....

For just a moment Bentley and Tyler whirled to stare at the door
giving onto the hall, their hands tightly gripping their automatics.

"God Almighty!" It came in a choked scream from the lips of Saret
Balisle, simultaneous with the falling of a shower of glass in the
room.

     -     -     -

Tyler and Bentley whirled back.

A giant anthropoid ape stood on the window sill, and the brute's left
hand held tightly clasped the ankle of Balisle, holding him as a child
holds a rag doll.

The ape swung Balisle out over the abyss.

Tyler flung up his automatic.

"Don't!" shouted Bentley. "If you shoot he'll drop Balisle!"

Bentley felt sick and the bottom seemed to drop out of his stomach as
the anthropoid, still holding Balisle as lightly as though he didn't
know he held extra weight at all, dropped from sight.

Tyler and Bentley leaped to the window, looked down. The ape had
dropped safely to the ledge of the window just below. He held on
easily with his right hand while Bentley and Tyler swayed dizzily. The
anthropoid still held Balisle by the ankle.

A head looked out of the window to the right. A frightened woman.

"God!" she choked. "That beast came out of the clothes closet. We've
been wondering why we couldn't open it. He must have been inside,
holding it."

A hundred men, all crack shots, stood helpless on roofs, in windows
across the street, in the street below, while the anthropoid ape
dropped slowly down the face of the Clinton Building toward the
street.

How would Barter lead his minion free of this tangle when, as was
inevitable, the brute reached ground level?




CHAPTER VII

_Strange Interview_


Bentley and Tyler were to learn in the next few minutes how great was
the executive ability of Caleb Barter. He had created a mighty puzzle,
each and every bit of which must fit together exactly. Time was
important in making the puzzle complete--and the puzzle changed with
each passing second. As the anthropoid went slowly down the face of
the Clinton Building, Bentley was sure that Barter controlled every
move and saw every slightest thing that transpired. He knew very well
that of all the great organization which had been set to prevent the
taking of Saret Balisle, not a man would now shoot at the ape for fear
of jeopardizing the life of Balisle.

And yet Balisle was being spirited away to pass through an experience
which would be far worse than a merciful bullet through the brain or
the heart. Bentley knew he would be justified in the eyes of humanity
if he ordered his men to fire upon the anthropoid, even if he were
sure that Balisle would die. But as long as there was life there was
hope, too, and he couldn't bring himself to give the order.

The ape dropped down the face of the building as easily as he would
have dropped from limb to limb of a jungle tree. The sixteen
stories under him did not disconcert him at all. Bentley had a
suspicion about this particular ape, but he wouldn't know for a
time yet whether his suspicion had a basis in fact. He couldn't think
of a man--especially an old man like Harold Hervey--making that
hair-raising descent. Yet ... if he were controlled, mind and soul,
by Caleb Barter the Mind Master...?

"Tyler," said Bentley tersely. "The instant the ape reaches the street
I'm going to order your men to fire. You will shout out to them now,
designating which ones shall fire. Be sure they are crack marksmen who
will drill the ape without hitting Balisle--and, by all means, have
them wait so that the ape's fall won't send Balisle crashing to
death."

"Maybe I'd better tell them to rush him?"

"Maybe that's better, but remember they're dealing with a giant
anthropoid, in strength at least, and that somebody is likely to be
fatally injured. In addition the ape may tear Balisle apart as soon as
men start to close in on him. Barter will have thought of that, and
all he'll have to do to make his puppet perform is to will him to do
it. No, they'll have to shoot--and tell them to aim at his head and
heart."

     -     -     -

Tyler leaned out of the window and shouted to the men across the
street.

"Shoot as soon as the ape reaches the sidewalk!" he cried. "Be careful
you don't hit Balisle."

And from Balisle himself, muffled and frightened, came a sudden cry.

"Shoot now! I'd rather fall and have it over with!"

There was a moment of silence. Bentley almost gave the order to fire
when the ape was at the twelfth story, but he held his tongue by a
supreme effort of will.

Balisle looked down. It must have been a terrifying experience to
swing above such a horrible abyss by one leg, and for a moment Balisle
lost his head. He screamed and started to grapple with his grim
captor.

"Don't, Balisle!" shouted Tyler. "You'll make him lose his balance.
Hang on as you are and we'll get him when he reaches the street."

"What good will it do?" screamed Balisle, his voice taking on a high
keening note as the ape dropped again, this time from the twelfth to
the eleventh floor. "He slipped it over a hundred men to get me this
far. He'll find a way to beat you when he reaches the street, too."

Bentley had a sinking feeling that Balisle spoke the truth; but even
so, he could not see how anybody, even Barter, could walk through the
trap which was being tightened around the descending anthropoid.

It made Bentley dizzy to watch the slow methodical descent of the
anthropoid. He could fancy himself in Balisle's position and it made
him sick and faint. He understood the desperation which caused Balisle
to make yet another attempt to battle with the ape.

Then the ape did a grim thing.

He paused on the eleventh floor, and crouching on a window sill,
deliberately snapped Balisle's head against the wall of the Clinton
Building! In his time Bentley had slain rabbits exactly like that.
Balisle hung now as limp as a rag and blood dripped from his mouth and
nose. But Bentley knew, as his face went white at the sound of that
sharp, thudding blow that Balisle had not been killed by it.

     -     -     -

Savage oaths burst from the lips of policemen who saw the action of
the ape.

"He acts like a human being! An ape wouldn't have thought of that!"

The words came hysterically from the lips of a woman who, frightened
though she was, could not tear herself from the window to the right of
where Bentley and Tyler leaned out to stare down.

Bentley smiled grimly. What would she think if he told her gravely
that the creature crawling down the face of the building was not quite
an ape?

So far the public didn't know what the Mind Master schemed. He'd
spoken of stealing brains, but that had meant nothing to the general
public. Just the maunderings of a madman, perhaps.

At the third floor the anthropoid hesitated. He seemed to be gazing
all around, noting the preparations which were being made to trap him
at the street level.

"An ape wouldn't do that," muttered Bentley. "A man would. The man in
that manape is showing through--but he won't be able to force himself
free of Barter's domination. If he could he'd probably throw Balisle
down now to keep him from being ... well, treated as Barter intends to
treat him."

The ape dropped to the second floor. Silence seemed to hang over Fifth
Avenue. Ugly gun muzzles protruded from every window across the
street. Scores of rifles were aimed down from windows in the Clinton
Building, to drill the ape through from above.

At that instant a limousine whirled into Fifth Avenue, traveling fast,
and ground to a stop under the ape.

"What's this?" cried Bentley.

"That's Saret Balisle's car," said Tyler. "There's nobody in it but
his chauffeur. The fool! Does he think he can take his master away
from the ape singlehanded?"

"That looks like foolhardy loyalty, but I'm not so sure that it's
Balisle's chauffeur at the wheel. Tyler, send somebody down to
wherever it is that Balisle parks his car."

     -     -     -

But before Tyler could move to obey, the anthropoid ape made his
surprise move, and did a thing which no ape would have thought of
doing. He hurled Balisle toward the limousine. The somersaulting body
struck the roof of the car, crashed through the fabric, and dropped
into the tonneau.

At the same instant the limousine leaped to full speed ahead.

A shower of bullets smashed windows and scored deeply and menacingly
the brick walls all around the giant anthropoid which for a second
still crouched on the second-story ledge. The ape whirled and crashed
through the window at his back.

"Tyler, send half a dozen cars after that limousine. They simply have
to catch it. But they mustn't fire for fear of killing Balisle. Have
the car followed right to Barter's hideout. The men in this building
will scatter at once through the building. We must trap that ape!"

The whole police organization was in a turmoil.

Sirens screamed as police cars flashed after the fleeing limousine
which carried Saret Balisle away. Doors slammed and windows crashed as
two score policemen scattered through the building, armed with riot
guns and pistols, seeking the ape.

Tyler, after barking the staccato orders which set his men in motion,
turned to Balisle's secretary.

"Quickly, the number Balisle calls when he wants his automobile sent
around."

The girl gave it, and Tyler called the number.

"Are Mr. Balisle's car and chauffeur there?" he asked.

He swore explosively and hung up the receiver.

"Another killing," he said. "Balisle's car is gone and the garage
people have just found his chauffeur, almost ripped to pieces, in
another car left at the garage for storage.

"That means this ape is armed with metal fingernails, just like the
one that killed the insurance man in the Flatiron Building. That means
he'll be doubly dangerous when caught. The murdered chauffeur will
have to wait for a few moments while we capture the ape."

     -     -     -

Shouts and shots rang through the Clinton Building. The ape was going
wild, crashing through doors and windows as if they weren't there. His
mad bellowing sounded terrifying in the extreme, so deep and rumbling
that the air seemed to tremble with its menace.

But in the end there came a chorus of triumphant shouts which told
that the giant ape had been surrounded.

Bentley and Tyler raced in the direction of the sounds. From all
directions came the sounds of footfalls as other plain-clothes men
raced to be in at the death. Bentley held his automatic tightly
gripped in his right hand. He knew exactly where he was going to aim
if the ape were not dead when he reached him.

The creature had been cornered in the areaway between two banks of
elevators and had climbed up the cage as high as he could go. He was
just out of reach of human hands, even had there been any men there
with the courage to try to take him alive. A white foam dripped from
the chattering lips of the anthropoid. His red-rimmed eyes flashed
fire. Bentley noted the little metal ball on top of the creature's
head.

Deliberately he stopped, raised his automatic, and held it steady
while he pressed the trigger with the extreme care which a
sharp-shooter knows to be necessary ... and a bullet ploughed through
the top of the ape's head.

The little ball vanished, and the ape released his grip suddenly. His
chattering died away to an uncertain murmur, the fire went out of his
eyes, and he fell to the floor. No bullet had yet actually struck him,
for he had whirled into the window from the second-story ledge
simultaneously with the barking of the policemen's rifles and pistols.
He had escaped there--but here he was not to escape.

Bentley and Tyler both lifted their voices to shout warnings to the
policemen, but their voices were drowned in the savage explosions of a
dozen weapons, in the hands of men who probably thought the creature
was in the act of charging ... and the ape sprawled on the floor, his
legs and arms quivering.

     -     -     -

Half a dozen men rushed forward, weapons extended.

"Keep back!" yelled Bentley, rushing in.

He stood over the ape, staring intently at his glazing eyes.

"Tyler," snapped Bentley, "have everybody fall back beyond earshot."

Tyler issued the orders. Bentley shouted, "Quickly, quickly!" knowing
he had little time.

Then, with Tyler beside him, he knelt beside the ape.

"I know you can't talk, but you can answer me by nodding or shaking
your head. You are Harold Hervey, aren't you?"

The eyes of the ape were hopeless. Tyler gasped, staring at Bentley as
though for a moment he thought him crazy. But in the next instant he
doubted his own sanity, for the ape, slowly and ponderously, nodded
his head.

"I'm going to name a number of places where I think you might have
been taken," went on Bentley. "In each case nod or shake your head. Is
it near Sixth Avenue?"

Slowly the great head moved, more slowly even than before; but it
nodded.

"Where? Below Twenty-third Street?"

Again the ponderous, agonizing nod.

Bentley went on.

"Below Fourteenth Street?"

Again the nod, barely perceptible this time.

"Below Christopher Street?" asked Bentley.

This time the head shook from side to side, ever so slightly.

"Two blocks above Christopher?"

But this question was never destined to be answered. The giant
anthropoid in whose skull-pan was the brain of Harold Hervey, entirely
controlled by Caleb Barter, until Bentley had shot the little metal
ball from his head, had died.

Bentley rose and looked down at the anthropoid for several seconds.

"Barter will hate to lose this creature," he said. "He probably has
just the number of apes he needs--and Tyler, here's a hunch: he'll
need an ape to take the place of this one! Get me the best surgeon to
be found in Manhattan, and get him as fast as you can!"

"Good God!" ejaculated Tyler. "What do you want a surgeon for? What
are you going to do?"

"Barter needs an ape to take the place of this one. I shall be that
ape!"




                  *       *       *       *       *




The Mind Master

By Arthur J. Burks

_Conclusion_

[Illustration: _"Now, Bentley," said Barter, "I'll explain
what I intend doing."_]




CHAPTER VIII

_The Mute Plungers_


It would be difficult to comprehend the nervous strain under which
Manhattan had been laboring during the past thirty-six hours. The
story of the kidnaping of Harold Hervey had not been given to the
newspapers, for an excellent reason. If Hervey's financial enemies
knew of his kidnaping and death they would hammer away at his stocks
until they fell to nothing and his family, accustomed to fabulous
wealth, would have been reduced to beggary.

The Mind Master himself, up to a late hour, had given no word to the
newspapers in his "manifestoes." The Hervey family held its breath
fearing that he would--for the newspapers would have played the story
for all the sensationalism it would carry. Bentley, when this matter
was called to his attention, wondered. Barter had kept his own counsel
for a purpose, but what was it? There was no way of asking him.

The story of the mad race down Broadway in pursuit of the limousine
which had returned the lifeless body of Hervey to his residence had
been a sensational one, and the tabloids had given it their best
treatment. The chauffeur who had crawled out like a monkey atop his
careening car, to lose his life when catapulted into the entrance to
the Twenty-third Street subway station: the three policemen whose
lives had been lost because the chauffeur hadn't stopped as they had
expected him to, the kidnaping of Saret Balisle by a great ape hadn't
yet broken as a story, nor the murder of Balisle's chauffeur.

But everybody knew something of the story of the naked man of the day
before. Many were the speculations as to what had ripped and torn his
flesh from his body, along with his clothes. What manner of claws had
it been which had sliced him in scores of places as though with many
razors?

Men and women walked the streets apprehensively, and many of them
turned at intervals to look behind them. No telling what they would do
when the story of Balisle's kidnaping by an anthropoid ape and a
queer mute chauffeur got abroad. To top it all the police pursuers
lost the Balisle limousine and Saret Balisle had taken his place among
the lost.

     -     -     -

Bentley knew as soon as the disgruntled and rather frightened police
officers returned to the Clinton Building with the news that Balisle
had got away from them in the stolen Balisle car, that already the
ill-fated young man was probably under the anesthetic which Caleb
Barter used on his victims.

"Tyler, do you know a surgeon who can do any surgical job short of
brain transplantation?"

"Yeah. There's a chap has offices in the Fifth Avenue Building. He's
probably the very best in the racket. Maybe it's because of his name.
It's Tyler."

"Some relative of yours?"

"Not much. He's just my dad--and one of the world's finest and
cleverest."

"Will he listen to reason? Can he perform delicate operations?"

"He's my dad, Bentley, and he'd do almost anything I asked him so long
as it was honest ... and he could switch the noses of a mosquito and a
humming bird so skillfully that the humming bird would go looking for
a sleeping cop and the mosquito would start building a nest in a
tree."

"Get him here. No--has he an operating room where all sound can be
shut out? I've got a hunch I'd like somehow to try and drop a screen
around us as we work. Maybe your dad would know what to do. You see,
I'm positive that Barter sees everything we do and if he sees me
turning into an ape he would just chuckle and pass up the trap."

"He's got a lead armored room where he keeps a bit of radium."

"That's it. Talk to him. No, not on the phone. You'll have to
figure out some way to do it so that you can be sure Barter isn't
listening."

"I'll manage. I'll send him a note."

"Your messenger will be killed on the way to him."

"Then I'll go myself."

"And Barter will watch everybody that goes into his office or comes
out, and mark down each person as possibly being connected with the
police. However, you figure it out."

     -     -     -

When Tyler had gone and the dead "ape" had been stretched out in one
corner of Balisle's office, and covered with something to cloak its
hideousness, Bentley telephoned Ellen Estabrook.

"Have I been making any appointments with you this morning?" he asked
her cheerily.

"Please don't jest when things are so terrible. Have you seen the
latest papers?"

"No. What do they say?"

"There's a lot of the story I'm thinking about. You'd better read it
right away. It's an extra, anyhow. The newsies ought to be calling it
around you somewhere--and where are you, anyway?"

Bentley informed her, and told her, too, that he would be with her as
soon as he possibly could. Taking the usual masculine advantage he
decided to tell her now what he wouldn't have had the heart to tell
her to her face, that he was planning a rather desperate stunt to
reach Barter, and would consequently be away from her for an
indefinite period.

"But I'll see you first?" she said after a long hesitation. Bentley
could hear her voice tremble, though he knew she was fighting
desperately to keep him from noting the catch in her voice.

"Yes, nothing will happen until--well, not until I've seen you
again."

Just as Bentley hung up the receiver the extra was being cried. Some
two hours had now elapsed since Balisle had been taken away, and now
the newsboys were shouting the headlines.

"Extra! Extra! All about the big Wall Street crash! Hervey fortune
entirely swept away!"

     -     -     -

Bentley sent an office boy out for the paper and spread it out on the
desk to digest it as quickly as possible.

"One million shares of Hervey Incorporated," read the black words in a
box on the first page--a story in mourning, "were dumped on the market
at eleven o'clock this morning. Four men seem to have been behind the
queer coup. One of them had a power of attorney from Harold Hervey
himself, and he had the shares to sell. So many shares were dumped
that the bottom fell out of the stock. Others holding the Hervey
shares, fearful that they would get nothing at all, also began to
dump, and every share thus dumped was bought up quickly by three other
men about whom nobody knew anything, except that they paid with cash.
The strangest thing about it all was that the three men who bought
Hervey Incorporated, seemed to be dumb-mutes, for they didn't say
anything. They acted through a broker, and indicated their purchases
with their fingers in the conventional manner and tendered cards as
identification! They were Harry Stanley, Clarence Morton, and Willard
Cleve--addresses unknown, history unknown.

"Nothing, in fact, is known about any of the three or the little
white-haired, apple-cheeked man who sold so heavily in Hervey
Incorporated. That the three mutes did not buy the shares sold by the
little white-haired man would seem to indicate that all four of them
worked together ... but it is only a supposition as they were not seen
together and apparently did not know one another. But the three mutes
constantly ate walnuts. All four men, who among them knocked the
bottom out of Wall Street, and wiped away the Hervey fortune, slipped
out in the excitement inspired by their rapid buying and selling, and
seemed to vanish into thin air."

Bentley didn't know much about the stock market, but it seemed to him
that Barter had managed a theft of mighty proportions. With a power of
attorney, which he had wrung from Hervey after his capture, he had
managed to possess himself of Hervey's shares. In themselves they were
worth millions. Even at a fraction of their price Barter would realize
heavily on them. Selling quickly he would force the price far down.
Then his puppets--and Bentley had no doubt that Stanley, Morton and
Cleve were his puppets--bought all other shares offered by panicky
investors in Hervey Incorporated at a tiny fraction of their value.
Far less, naturally, than Barter had made by selling his loot.

The purchased shares Barter could hold for an increase. Hervey
Incorporated was good and its price would go up again, and Barter
would sell and gain millions.

     -     -     -

That is how Bentley saw it, and his lips drew into a firmer,
straighter line as, half an hour later, he explained it all to Ellen.

"It's desperate, dear," he whispered in her ear. "Manhattan's
financial structure has been shaken to its foundations. But that isn't
all by any means. Barter has performed his horrible operation on two
of New York's most brilliant men. It was a Barter gesture to send
'Harold Hervey' to capture Balisle, and the horror of it staggered
me."

"Lee," said Ellen, "understand this: that if I have no word from you
within seventy-two, no, forty-eight hours after you get started on
this scheme you have in mind, I'm going to get through to Barter
somehow. If I put an ad in the paper and tell him where I'm to be
found he'll surely make another attempt to take me in. If he's
captured you, or uncovered the trap you're laying, then I'll at least
be with you. If he kills you he kills me. If we can't live together we
can die together."

Bentley kissed her fervently, trying not to think what it would mean
to him now if she were in the hands of Caleb Barter. Secretly he
intended having Tyler keep her so closely guarded that she couldn't
possibly do anything as foolish as she had suggested.

The late evening papers carried another manifesto of the Mind Master
to the effect that the remaining eighteen men named on the original
list were to be taken before noon of the next day.

Oddly enough eighteen kidnapings were reported from various places in
Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens.

"So," thought Bentley, "he's afraid to send out normal apes to capture
his eighteen key men. Maybe his control over them is not perfect.
That's it. I suppose--he needs human brains before he can exercise
perfect control. I suppose Stanley, Morton and Cleve did the
kidnapings."

     -     -     -

Late that night Bentley kissed Ellen good-by, told her to keep up her
courage, and repaired to the rendezvous arranged for by Thomas Tyler
and his surgeon father. In the operating room was the cold body of the
anthropoid that had successfully abducted Saret Balisle.

"Young man," said Dr. Tyler, "just what is it you want me to do? I'm
not asking for your reasons. Tommy tells me you know what you're
doing. I must say though, I don't believe that story of brain
transplantation. No doctor would believe it for a minute."

Bentley looked at the dead ape.

"You'll take Tommy's word for it that that ape kidnaped Saret Balisle
to-day and took him down the face of a building, sixteen stories to
the ground?"

"Of course. Tommy wouldn't string his father."

"Well, part of your surgical work to-night will make it necessary for
you to look at that creature's brain. You'll recognize a human brain
in that ape's skull. After you've made that discovery, here's what I
want you to do: I'll strip to the skin; then I want you to place the
skin of that ape on me, so that from top to toes I am an ape. You'll
have to do the job so perfectly that I'll _be_ an ape--as soon as,
under your watchful eye and Tom's, I have mastered all the ape
mannerisms the three of us can remember. Can you do it?"

Tyler senior shrugged.

He motioned his son and Bentley to help him lift the huge ape body to
the operating table, and under the glaring light above he set to work
with instruments which gleamed like molten silver, then became a
sullen red....




CHAPTER IX

_The Furry Mime_


"Listen, boys," said Dr. Tyler, after he had removed the skin of the
ape, and for a few brief seconds had examined the brain, to shake his
head in astonishment. "I've an idea that may help you. It would be
impossible for you, Bentley, to play the ape well enough to fool this
mad Mind Master. But a hitherto unknown type of ape has just been
discovered in Colombia. I read the story of it in a scientific journal
to-day. The ape is more manlike than any other known to science. You
shall be that ape, brought in during the night by a famous returned
explorer. There will be great interest in you now that the story of
Saret Balisle's kidnaping has broken. With the attention of New York
upon you, certainly your presence will interest Caleb Barter."

Tyler senior rummaged in a pile of papers on his desk and brought
forth the story he referred to, which also carried a picture of the
Colombian ape.

"It would be impossible for me to change your shape and add to your
size sufficiently to make you a real giant anthropoid. You'd have to
be twice as deep through the chest; you'd have to have bowed legs as
big as small tree trunks; you'd have to have a sloping forehead. No,
it's impossible, for I'd have to equip you by padding to an impossible
degree, and a scientist would only need to touch you to know you as an
imitation ape. But if you are made up as the Colombian ape--"

Bentley quickly interrupted.

"The idea is excellent. I was dubious before about my chances of
success, but as an ape of a new species I have a far better chance,
and my inevitable human behavior won't be so noticeable."

     -     -     -

Dr. Tyler measured Bentley as carefully as a tailor, proud of his
skill, measures a particular, wealthy customer.

"You will almost suffocate," he said, keeping up a running monologue
as his inspired hands worked with forceps and scalpels, "but I can
make plenty of air vents in the ape skin which will allow the pores of
your skin to breathe. If they are hidden under the hair they will
scarcely be noticed, unless of course Barter sees what we are doing
here and suspects from the beginning."

"I can stand the discomfort for as long as may prove necessary," said
Bentley grimly, conquering a feeling of terror as he already saw
himself in the role of an ape, a role previously played in which he
had suffered the torments of the damned, "and anything is preferable
to the wholesale carnage which Barter is doing. In seventy-two hours
he has wrecked the morale of Manhattan. I shall try to get it back.
Tyler, will you make every effort to guard the other eighteen men
named on the Mind Master's original list?"

"Of course," but Tyler said it dubiously. Barter had proved it almost
impossible to outwit him. In their hearts both Bentley and Tyler knew
that Barter would make good his boast to take the eighteen men he had
named. It seemed a grim price Manhattan must pay to be finally rid of
Barter's satanic machinations.

When Bentley, stripped naked, quietly announced his readiness to take
his place on the operating table, Tyler senior took a deep breath,
like a diver preparing to plunge into icy water, and looked
questioningly at Bentley.

"I'm ready, sir," said Bentley quietly. "Let's get on with the task."

Dr. Tyler set to work with amazing, uncanny speed. He had never been
more skilful in closing sutures of the flesh in any of his myriad of
operations. He was a man inspired as he labored on the task of
changing Lee Bentley from a normal human being to a Colombian ape.

     -     -     -

While the surgeon worked his son telephoned to the Colombian explorer
whose return from Latin-America had been mentioned in the day's news.
He couldn't explain anything over the telephone, he said, but would
Doctor Jackson come at once to the private offices of James Tyler,
surgeon?

Doctor Jackson grumbled, but the urgency in the voice of Tyler
convinced him that the thing was important. He promised to be on hand
within an hour. It then lacked a few minutes of three o'clock in the
morning.

Next at Bentley's suggestion--and he talked quickly and eagerly to
keep his mind off the ordeal he knew he was facing--Tyler got the
curator of the Bronx Zoo out of bed and asked him to wait upon Doctor
Tyler immediately.

At four o'clock Doctor Jackson and the curator entered the room where
Surgeon Tyler had performed a miracle.

Doctor Jackson stepped back in amazement when he noted the manlike ape
which leaned with arms folded against one wall of the operating room.
His eyes were big with amazement.

He studied Bentley for several minutes, while no one spoke a word.

It was the curator who broke the strained silence.

"So this is your Colombian ape," he said. "I read the news story, but
I understood that the ape you had found had been killed in the attempt
to capture it."

Surgeon Tyler spoke easily.

"That news story," he said, "was to prevent Doctor Jackson from being
annoyed by visitors eager to see his find. As a matter of sober fact
Doctor Jackson captured the Colombian ape alive and is now about to
turn it over to the zoo. Understand me, Doctor Jackson?"

     -     -     -

Still the explorer said nothing. For a moment longer he stared at
Bentley; then he walked over to him.

"The hair is different," he said as though talking to himself. "The
Colombian ape's hair is of a slightly finer texture. But that
could be explained away as I allowed only the merest bit of
information to the reporters to-day. I can add a supplementary
story in the next newspaper which will explain that the coarse fur
of the Colombian ape is the only thing about it which makes it
resemble a giant anthropoid."

Jackson had walked to Bentley without fear and ran his fingers through
the hair as he spoke.

"I know it's a man, and some surgeon has performed a miracle," he
said. "Just what is it you wish me to do?"

"You've read the stories relating to the Mind Master, Doctor?" asked
Bentley suddenly. How strangely his voice came from the body of an
ape!

"I've read some of them," answered Jackson. "Is this a scheme whereby
you hope to trap the Mind Master?"

"Yes."

"Then depend upon me for any assistance I can render. As a scientist I
understand fully the power for evil of a mad genius of our class. This
Mind Master should be ruthlessly destroyed."

"Thank you," said Bentley, stepping forward. "You know, perhaps, how
the Colombian ape behaves, enough that you can coach me how to walk,
how to gesture?"

"Certainly. It will take perhaps an hour to prepare you to fill your
role creditably."

     -     -     -

Jackson's face flushed with enthusiasm. He was launched on a task
which fired his interest. He was an authority on apes and anything
relating to them inspired him.

"Seat yourself on a chair," said Jackson. "The Colombian ape sits
upright like a man."

Bentley seated himself as Jackson had bidden him.

"Now spread your legs apart awkwardly, with the knees straight. The
Colombian ape doesn't exactly sit on a chair or a rock or a tree, he
leans against it in a _half_ sitting position."

Bentley quickly assumed the awkward strained position suggested by
Jackson.

Jackson stepped up to him and placed Bentley's arms, unbent, so that
his fists hung down outside his wide-apart knees, and cupped his
fingers so that they seemed perpetually in the act of closing on
something.

"You can't possibly take the proper position with your toes," went on
Jackson, "for it's beyond a man's ability to curve his toes as he does
his hands. The Colombian ape's toes are prehensile."

"Can't you say in your next news story, Doctor," suggested Bentley,
"that the Colombian ape, the nearest animal relative of man, seems to
be in an advanced stage of evolution. Can you not say that the
Colombian ape is by way of losing the use of his toes?"

"Many scientists know that to be untrue," said Jackson, "but perhaps
we can help you through your scheme before they begin denying details
in the newspapers. Too bad we can't send secret suggestions to all
anthropologists that they remain discreetly silent until the mantle of
horror is lifted from Manhattan. But of course we can't, since we'd
betray ourselves. Our only hope, then, is to work at top speed."

"I am as eager as anyone to finish a particularly horrible task," said
Bentley.

     -     -     -

Under Jackson's instructions Bentley walked up and down the
room. His shaggy shadow on the several walls as he turned, marched
and countermarched at Jackson's commands, filled Bentley with
self-loathing. He found himself repulsive. His body perspired
freely impregnating the ape skin with a harsh odor that was
biting and terrible in his nostrils. It was sickening. He tried to
close his mind to the repulsiveness of what he was doing.

He walked with a swaying, side-to-side gait, something like a sailor's
rolling walk, while his arms swung free at his sides as though they
merely hung from his body. The Colombian ape walked like that, Jackson
said.

"How about the intelligence of the Colombian ape?" asked Bentley.

"We shot the only specimen so far seen by man before we could discover
any facts bearing on his intelligence," said Jackson.

"Then you can safely say that he possesses intelligence far beyond
that of known apes," said Bentley quickly, "somewhere, let us say,
between that of the lowest order of mankind and civilized man."

Jackson nodded his held dubiously.

"It seems," he said unsmilingly, "that I arrived in the United States
at exactly the right time! You would have failed signally to convince
the Mind Master in the role of an African great ape."

Bentley managed a short laugh. How horribly it came from the lips of
an ape!

"I'm not overly superstitious," he said, "but I regard this as a good
omen. I feel we're sure to succeed in what we are planning. I think
Barter will surely wish to experiment with me if he thinks I am in
reality a great ape from Colombia. He'll welcome the chance to examine
any ape which so nearly resembles man. I'm an important link in his
plan to create a race of supermen. At least that's how we must hope
that Barter will estimate the situation when my story is told in
to-morrow's papers."

     -     -     -

An hour before dawn Doctor Jackson, weary from his arduous instruction
of the equally exhausted Bentley, pronounced Lee a satisfactory
"ape."

"Now here's where you come in," said Bentley tiredly to the curator.
"I'm to be taken now to a cage in the Bronx. During the rest of to-day
you will quietly instruct your attendants that their guard to-night at
the zoo must not be too strict. I must be in position to be stolen by
the minions of the Mind Master."

Now the full significance of the desperate expedition upon which
Bentley was embarking came home to them all. Their faces were white.
Bentley shuddered under his ape robe. His mind went catapulting back
into the past to the time when he had been Manape. This was much like
it, save that all of him was now encased in the accouterments of an
ape and he did not suffer the mental hazards which had almost driven
him insane when he had been Manape, with the perpetual necessity of
keeping close watch over his own human body which had held the brain
of an ape.

He stiffened. "I'm ready," he said.

Immediately upon arrival the curator had been asked to have a closed
car, quickly walled with a mixture of lead and zinc--which Bentley and
Tyler hoped would thwart the spying of Caleb Barter--brought to
Tyler's door.

Three or four zoo attendants entered with a cage when Bentley
pronounced himself ready. They stared agape at Bentley and their faces
went white when he strode toward them upright, like a man.

Bentley would have spoken to reassure them, but Tyler signaled him to
keep silent. The zoo attendants might talk and entirely spoil their
scheme.

     -     -     -

Two hours later, long before the first crowds began to arrive at the
Bronx Zoo, Lee Bentley was driven from his small cage in the car, into
a huge cage at the zoo. From a dark corner, in which he crouched as
though overcome with fear, he gazed affrightedly out across what he
could see of Bronx Park.

"When I used to feed the animals here," he said to himself, "I never
expected that the time would come when I myself would be caged--and
one of them."

The curator had ridden out with the cage. But, save for making sure of
the fastening on the big cage, he paid no heed to Bentley. He treated
him, of necessity, as though he were actually the Colombian ape he
pretended to be. From now on until he succeeded or failed, Lee Bentley
was an ape from the jungles of Latin-America.

Just before the crowds could reasonably be expected to begin arriving,
curious to see this strange thing Doctor Jackson had brought from
Colombia, an attendant arrived with a freshly painted sign.

"Colombian Great Ape," it read, "Presented to Bronx Zoo by Doctor
Claude Jackson."

It seemed to close entirely behind Lee Bentley the vast door which
separated the apes from civilization. Miserably he crouched in his
corner and awaited the coming of the curious.




CHAPTER X

_Grim Anticipation_


A numbing fear began to grow upon Lee Bentley as the ordeal of waiting
began.

Naturally he could not eat the food given usually to apes and of
course he could not be seen calmly eating bacon and eggs with knife
and fork. And because he couldn't eat he was assailed by a dreadful
hunger, which, however, he managed to fight down partially. He smiled
inwardly as he looked ahead and understood that despite the warnings
not to feed the animals, children of all ages, from four years to
sixty, would surreptitiously toss peanuts and walnuts into his cage.

He felt a little hopeful about it. They would at least allay his
hunger.

But no, he could not do that, either. Nobody had thought to ask Doctor
Jackson how a Colombian ape manipulated his food. Even a certain
clumsiness in that respect might start questions which would cause the
public to doubt the authenticity of Jackson's find.

Bentley decided to sulk. The ape he was supposed to be could
reasonably be expected to resent captivity and would probably go on a
hunger strike. He would do likewise and be in character if he
starved.

He crouched in a far corner as the first comers began to arrive. They
were fathers and mothers with their children, and the older people
carried, usually, newspapers under their arms. Bentley wished with all
his soul that he could see one of the papers close enough to read the
headlines.

However, when the crowd was not too thick, Bentley waddled nearer to
the wire mesh which separated him from the curious crowd and through
lids which were half closed as though he slept, he managed to glimpse
a few excerpts from the paper:

"Police department redoubling their precautions to prevent Mind Master
from capturing eighteen intended victims."

"Hideout of Mind Master still undiscovered. When will the public be
delivered from the stupidity of the police?"

"Doctor Jackson returns from Colombia, bringing a living specimen of
an ape hitherto unknown to civilized man, but more like him than any
ape hitherto known. Visitors may see the creature to-day in the Bronx
Zoo."

     -     -     -

That was the story which had brought out the visitors who were
forming, moment by moment, a bigger crowd before Bentley's cage.
Bentley managed a glimpse of a woman's wrist-watch after what seemed
an age of trying to do so without his intention becoming plain to the
too bright children who crowded as close to the cage as attendants
would permit. It was ten o'clock. It would be at least twelve more
hours before Bentley could reasonably expect any action on the part of
Barter. Barter would now be concentrating on his plans to kidnap the
eighteen men he had first named.

Bentley tried to make the time pass faster by imagining what Barter
would be doing. By now his labors must be titanic. He must have
separate controls for each of his minions, and there were many times
when he must control several at one time, thus making his task akin to
that of a man trying to look two ways at once, while he rolled a
cigarette with one hand and shined his shoes with the other.
Certainly the concentration required was enormous.

Yet, no matter how complicated became his puzzle, Barter was its
master because he was its creator, and Bentley hadn't the slightest
doubt that, until someone actually penetrated Barter's stronghold, he
would not be stopped.

Bentley knew that at the very first opportunity he would destroy Caleb
Barter as he would have destroyed a mad dog or stamped to death a
deadly snake. The life of one man would rest lightly upon his
conscience, if that man were Caleb Barter.

Perhaps, though, he could learn many of Barter's secrets before he
destroyed him. Properly used they might prove boons to mankind. It was
only the use Barter was putting them to that threatened to fill the
world with horror and bloodshed.

     -     -     -

"Mama, why don't he eat?"

"Hush," said a woman, as though afraid the Colombian ape would hear
and become angry; "don't annoy the creature. He looks fully capable of
coming right out at us."

But the child who had been admonished began to juggle a bag of peanuts
which he managed to throw into the cage. Bentley stooped forward,
sniffing suspiciously at the sack, while a wave of hunger made him
feel weak and giddy for a moment. He just realized that he hadn't
eaten for almost twenty-four hours. His time had been so filled with
action and excitement that there hadn't been opportunity.

"I hope," he said to himself, in an effort to drive away thoughts of
food, "that Tyler will take every precaution to prevent Ellen from
doing something foolish."

Knowing that he could no longer communicate with her, could no longer
be absolutely sure that she was still out of Barter's clutches, he
suffered agonies of fear for her safety.

"If Barter places a hand on her I'll tear his skin from his carcass,
bit by bit!" he said, unconsciously clenching his fists.

"Oh, look, mama, he's shuttin' his fists as though he wanted to fight
somebody! I'll bet he could whip Dempsey, couldn't he, mama?"

"Perhaps he could, son. Hush now, and watch him. There's a good boy!"

It brought Bentley sharply back to his surroundings and proved to him
that he must not allow his mind to go wool-gathering if he did not
wish to give himself away. What if, in an access of anger, he happened
to speak his thoughts aloud? He could imagine the amazement of the
crowd.

     -     -     -

The day wore on.

At noon a strange horror seemed to travel over the Bronx Zoo, and
within a short time every last visitor had precipitately departed.
Bentley could now safely approach the wire mesh and look out and
around over a wider radius.

Right under the wire mesh was a newspaper someone had thrown away.

By pressing tightly against the mesh Bentley could see the headlines.

"Mind Master successful on all counts!"

So that's what had turned the crowd to stony silence with very fear?
They had all fled, wondering who would be next. Bentley had heard the
shouting of the extra on the distant streets, but it had been so far
away he hadn't heard the words. One solitary newspaper had appeared
among the Bronx crowd and the story it carried under startling
scareheads had passed from brain to brain as though by magic ... and
the crowd had fled.

Bentley stared down at the newspaper in horror, a horror that was in
no way mitigated by his having fully expected Barter to succeed.
Mutually, with no words having been spoken to express the thought,
Tyler and Bentley had conceded to Barter the eighteen victims he had
named.

Nothing could be done to stop him. His brains were greater than the
combined wisdom of the city of New York.

What else was in that paper?

Bentley stared at it for an hour, and finally a vagrant breeze, for
which he had hoped and prayed during that hour, whipped across the
park and stirred the paper. He read more headlines.

"Lee Bentley disappears! Believed kidnaped or slain by Mind Master!"

How had that story got out? Surely Tyler would have kept that from the
press. Following on the heels of the Colombian ape story, Barter would
almost surely put two and two together to arrive at the proper total.

     -     -     -

Bentley read on:

"Ellen Estabrook, fiancée of Lee Bentley, disappears mysteriously from
her hotel room. Guarded by a score of police, not one has yet been
found who knows anything of her disappearance or saw her leave. Nobody
seems to have seen anyone go to her room or leave it. Our police
department must have fallen on evil days indeed when twenty crack
plain-clothes men cannot keep one woman under surveillance."

Something was radically wrong, but Bentley could not piece the whole
story together, simply because he had been out of touch for so many
hours that the thread of it had slipped from his fingers.

Suddenly Bentley noticed that a solitary man was watching him
curiously, a dawning amazement in his face. Bentley roused himself and
saw that he was standing against the mesh, fingers hooked into it
above his head, his weight on his left leg, his right foot crossed
over his left, his head thoughtfully bowed.

To the amazed man yonder the "Colombian ape" must have looked
remarkably like a condemned man clutching the bars of his cell,
awaiting the coming of the executioner.

Bentley recovered himself and sat down on the floor of the cage in the
loose easy manner an ape would have used.

He forced himself to sit thus until evening, when the last curious one
vanished from the park and darkness began to fall.

Then excitement at the approach of a hoped for denouement began to
rise in his heart like a rushing tide.

Would Barter fall for the ruse? Or did he already know that the
Colombian ape was Lee Bentley?

In either case, Bentley thought, the Mind Master would take action
during the first hours of darkness. Bentley was gambling desperately
on what he knew to be characteristic of Caleb Barter.




CHAPTER XI

_In the Dead of Night_


Bentley knew that if Ellen were in the hands of Caleb Barter the mad
professor would probably do her no harm, but use her as a club against
Bentley, and through Bentley, the Manhattan police. He did not believe
that the Mind Master would consider performing the brain operation on
Ellen. Caleb Barter's scheme seemed to consider only men, and men of
substance.

No, Ellen would not be harmed, he felt, but that made him feel no
easier, knowing that she might be in the hands of Barter.

How could he know of Naka Machi, and the refined vengeance of the Mind
Master?

The last visitors had left the park and comparative quiet settled over
the zoo. Save for the sounds of animals feeding and the occasional
cursing voices of attendants there were no sounds. Not since Bentley
had taken his place in the cage had anyone spoken to him. He had
never felt so lonely and uncertain in his life.

Now there was utter darkness and silence.

And then before his cage appeared a tiny spot of light. If Barter's
minions expected to deal with a powerful ape they would come prepared
to subdue him by whatever means seemed necessary. Bentley had no wish
to be injured, and yet he must make some show of resistance in order
to allay any possible suspicion that he _wished_ to be stolen.

There was a faint gnawing sound at the wire outside the cage. Mice
might have made that sound, sharpening their teeth on the wire.
Bentley decided to feign sleep. Had Barter come personally to
supervise his capture? That didn't seem reasonable as Barter must
realize that all his effectiveness depended upon his ability to retain
control of whatever organization he might have built up--and his
central control must be his hideout.

Then he would be sending some of his puppets to get Bentley.

Would they be apes with man's brains? Impossible. Apes could not
travel from place to place without attracting attention, especially if
they traveled unguarded and went casually to a given destination as
men would go. So, if his puppets were not men in the normal meaning,
then they were "apemen."

     -     -     -

The wire came softly down. Bentley hoped that no attendant might come
blundering around now to spoil everything. His heart pounded with
excitement.

At last he was going to see Caleb Barter again at close quarters.

"I shall destroy him," he told himself.

The shadowy outlines of two men came through the severed wires.
Bentley still pretended to be asleep. He wondered if Barter's
televisory equipment included any arrangements permitting him to see
in the dark, and knew instantly that it did. How else could these two
puppets have come so unerringly to the proper cage in Bronx Park?

No, Bentley did not dare allow himself to be taken easily in the hope
that his actions would pass unnoticed.

But he waited until the ropes began to fall about him, testing the
strength of his adversaries by mental measurement. By their uncertain,
hesitating actions he knew that he dealt only with the _forms_ of
men--forms which were ruled by brains which had not in themselves
intelligence enough to perform the acts they were now performing. Ape
brains in the skull-pans of men. The brains in themselves were only
important because they were living matter which was being used as a
sensory sounding board by which Caleb Barter, the Mind Master,
transmitted his commands to the arms and legs and bodies of his
puppets.

Bentley sprang into action. He growled and snarled at the two men who
were trying to take him. Only two men? Surely Barter would have sent
more than two men to take a great ape! He knows I'm not a true ape,
thought Bentley. He's giving me a challenge. He knows I wish to get to
his hideout and he is making sure that I get there.

But Bentley was only guessing. Calmness descended upon him as he
realized that he was soon to face a crucial test.

     -     -     -

Just now, however, he struck out at the two men who were striving to
bind him. They were husky chaps, and one of them packed the wallop of
a real fighter. Neither man said a word to him, and when his own hands
clawed at them--how would he dare strike out with his fists?--the men
made queer animal sounds in their throats. Bentley could well
remember how helpless, hopeless and lost he had felt when his brain
had been in the skull-pan of Manape.

The brain of an ape could not be a terribly intelligent instrument in
the first place. What thoughts, if apes had thoughts at all, coursed
through an ape brain which found itself inside a human skull?

The answer to that was simple: only such thoughts as Barter originated
and transmitted through the mental sounding board. After all, the
material of the human brain and the ape brain were perhaps very much
alike, and Barter was working on a sound scientific principle in
making a sounding board of an ape's brain.

Bentley shuddered through the fur that covered him. Knowing the sort
of creatures with which he had to deal--men in all things save their
intelligence--made him tremble with nausea. Such grim, ghastly
hybrids. But he stopped shuddering when he recalled that he still
dealt with men after all--at least with one man, Caleb Barter. When he
thought of these two "apemen" as separate entities of a human being of
many personalities--Caleb Barter--he was able to plan some method by
which to deal with them.

So now he fought, seemingly with the utmost savagery, to keep them
from binding him with ropes. Even as he fought, however, he fancied he
could hear the grim chuckling of Caleb Barter. What did Barter know?

Bentley knew that eventually he would discover the truth.

     -     -     -

In struggling against the two "men" his hands encountered the knobs on
their heads--the tiny metal balls protruding from the top of the skull
at the point where, in babies, the head remains soft during babyhood.
He could have broken connection with Barter for these two by jerking
the controls free. And then what? He would never get through to Barter
and would release in Bronx Park two men whose strange type of
madness, when they were discovered, would startle the countryside. Two
men with the savagery of anthropoid apes! He shuddered as he carefully
refrained from disturbing those balls.

At last Bentley was quite securely bound, only his lower limbs
remaining free so that he could walk, though the length of his steps
was strictly limited. His hands were entirely and securely bound, and
the significance of this fact did not escape him. Barter knew that he
did not need his hands to aid him in walking! Of course the newspaper
story released by Doctor Jackson had reported the Colombian ape as
being able to walk exactly like a man.

But that didn't prevent Bentley from nursing the suspicion that Barter
already _knew_. Even if he did, it could in no wise alter the
determination of Bentley. His task was to penetrate the hideout of
Barter--and he was on the way there now.

     -     -     -

With little attempt at concealment the two men led Bentley to a long
black closed car outside the park. They met no one. The two men
avoided discovery with uncanny ease. Bentley thrilled with excitement.
He felt he knew approximately where Barter's hideout was.

It was useless, to speculate, however; time would show it to him.

Bentley was tossed into the tonneau of the car. His two captors,
moving with the precision of men in a trance, took their places in the
front seat. Bentley struggled for a time against his bonds. He wanted
to sit up and peer out, to see what way they took so that he would
know where he was when he reached Barter's hideout. But of course,
even if he shook his bonds free he did not dare rise to a sitting
position, for to control the intricate handling of his two puppets,
Barter's attention must have been pretty carefully fixed upon this
car.

So Bentley contented himself with waiting.

Lying on his back on the floor of the car he tried to see what he
could through the car windows. He knew when he was carried under an
elevated system by the crashing roar of trains over his head. He knew
he was being carried downtown, but he wasn't sure that this was the
Sixth Avenue elevated.

How could he find out the road they were traveling without sitting up
and looking at street signs?

     -     -     -

He felt he didn't dare do that. He'd be as careful as possible on the
off-chance that Barter really believed him a Colombian ape, when the
benefit of surprise would be with Bentley.

The car progressed downtown at a normal speed. It stopped for red
lights and obeyed all other traffic regulations. Barter was taking no
chance on losing more of his puppets.

Bentley suddenly gasped with horror as he remembered something.
Eighteen important men of Manhattan had been kidnaped that day by
Caleb Barter. Would Bentley be forced to watch the mad professor
perform the eighteen inevitable operations?

Perspiration poured from every pore as he visualized the horror he
might be compelled to witness when he was finally taken into Barter's
hideout. The ape skin clung to him as though it were actually his own.
There were even moments when Bentley feared that it might grow to
him.

But he put the feeling of horror from him with the thought that if
Ellen were in Barter's power, Barter might even be forcing her to
anesthetize for him while he performed his grisly slaughter.

Bentley's courage returned and now it seemed to him that the journey
would never end, so eager was he to discover whether or not Ellen had
eluded the hands of the Mind Master.




CHAPTER XII

_A Woman of Courage_


Caleb Barter smiled warmly at the woman who had come to him almost as
though in answer to a prayer. He admired her flashing eyes and the
lifted chin which spoke of pride and courage.

"I had thought of improving the feminine strain of the race also," he
told her, but almost as though he spoke to himself, "but I realized
that it mattered little the stature of the mothers of the race as long
as the fathers were made virile. But if all women were like yourself,
Miss Estabrook, the race would not require the improvement it is now
my duty to bestow upon it."

Ellen stared directly into the eyes of the white-haired old man. As
she looked at him she found it hard to believe that one so gentle from
outward appearances had such a vast, grim power for evil. In repose
his face was kindly, though there was something out of character in
the fact that it was so apple rosy. And his lips were far too red.

"Where," she said quietly, fearlessly, "is Lee Bentley?"

Barter raised his eyebrows as he stared back at her. So far she had
not looked around at this great room into which he had had her
conducted; she had seemed interested only in her mission, whatever
that might be.

"You mean that delightfully rude young man?" he asked sardonically.

"You know well enough whom I mean! Where is he?"

"Then he is not to be found in his usual haunts?"

"He has disappeared."

"And you come out seeking Professor Barter because Bentley his
disappeared! It is almost as though you had previously arranged with
him to come seeking me if, at a certain time he failed to return from
some mysterious rendezvous...."

     -     -     -

Barter's face was now a mask of uncanny shrewdness. In a few words he
had pierced through Ellen's secret of why she had deliberately placed
herself in the way of Barter's minions in order to be taken, and now
he had used the words of her own questions to form a weapon against
her. Ellen gasped in terror.

Had she made a hideous mistake? Had she, by failing to wait for word
from Bentley, ruined all his well laid plans?

Barter now stood before her, his eyes almost shooting fire.

"Tell me quickly," he began, and for a second she thought he would put
his hands on her, "what sort of plan is he making to betray me into
the hands of my enemies, who are the enemies of super-civilization
because they are my enemies?"

"I know of nothing," said Ellen stoutly, hoping that she had not,
after all, betrayed the fact that she knew Bentley had started to work
out an unusual scheme. The details she didn't know, for Lee hadn't
told her. "But I do know, what all the world knows, that he was
helping the police against you. Naturally, then, when he vanished I
thought of you. Besides you had already warned him that you would
remove him in your own good time. He caused you the loss of two of
your puppets and I thought, naturally enough, that you would try to
remove him to some place where he could not operate so successfully
against you."

"That's all?" queried Barter eagerly. "You don't know of some special
scheme that has been worked out to trap me?"

"I know of no scheme. Now that I am in your hands, Professor, what do
you intend doing with me?"

Barter stared at Ellen for several minutes.

"I haven't captured Bentley ... yet," he said at last, slowly, "but I
shall--no doubt about that. It is inevitable--as inevitable as Caleb
Barter. I can use him in my labors for humanity. How I treat him after
he is taken depends somewhat on you. You may therefore consider
yourself a sort of hostage. I have much medical work to perform. Have
you ever been a nurse?"

     -     -     -

Ellen recoiled in horror. "You don't mean you would ask me to help you
perform those horrible--" She stopped abruptly before her sudden
tendency to hysterics should make her say things to anger Barter too
far.

"So," he said quickly, "you think my brain operations are horrible,
eh? Well, you shall see that they are not horrible; that Professor
Barter, the greatest scientist the world has ever produced, is really
preparing to prevent civilization from utterly decaying."

"And afterward?" asked Ellen. "I know that eventually you will be
taken and that the people will destroy you, tear you limb from limb.
But you will never believe that. Tell me, then, what you plan to do
with me."

For a brief time he considered the matter.

"I am an old man," he said at last, musingly, "but I am young in
spirit and in body. It would be amusing to have a mate--but no, no,
that would not do! The destiny of Caleb Barter is not linked with a
woman. You would simply hold me back. However, I have often been
interested in miscegenation and its effect on the race if properly
guided. My assistant Naka Machi, is one of the finest specimens of his
race. Perhaps I shall arrange for you to mate with him, under
conditions which I shall dictate, in order to experiment with your
offspring...."

Ellen swayed, her face going dead white. She hadn't yet met Naka
Machi, but his name told her enough. The thought of a Japanese,
however, was far less repellent than the cold, calm way in which
Barter spoke of using the offspring of such a union.

"I'll kill myself at the first opportunity," said Ellen suddenly.

     -     -     -

Barter put his forefinger under Ellen's chin in a paternal fashion.
His eyes looked deeply into hers. She thought of what his fingers had
done in the past ... those long slender fingers. His touch made her
shudder.

But his eyes held her. They seemed like deep wells. Then they were
like black coals advancing upon her out of the darkness, growing
bigger and bigger as they came, with little flames in their centers
also growing as they approached.

"You will submit your will to mine," said the soft voice of Caleb
Barter.

His right hand was making swift snakelike movements back of Ellen's
head. His voice droned on, but already it seemed to Ellen to come from
a vast distance.

"Your mind will be concerned only with the welfare of Caleb Barter,"
droned on the voice. "You will think only of Caleb Barter; your
greatest desire will be to serve him. There is nothing you would not
do for him. Let your objective mind sleep until Caleb Barter wakens
it; give your subjective mind into my keeping."

Beads of perspiration broke out on the cheeks of Caleb Barter as he
worked quickly to place the girl entirely under his skilled hypnosis.
At last she stood like a statue, her wide-open eyes staring into
space, straight ahead. She did not move. She scarcely seemed to
breathe.

"You will know that my home is your home, Ellen," said Barter softly.
"You will feel that you are welcome here and that you love this place.
It needs the attention of a loving woman; you will give it that
attention. But you will be subservient always to my will. You will
enter upon your duties."

Ellen Estabrook sighed softly as though with relief. Her hands went up
to remove her hat, which she placed on a chair in a corner of the
hellish laboratory. She removed her light coat and arranged her hair
with skilled fingers. But even as she moved around the room of the
long table her eyes stared vacantly into space. She was as much a
puppet of Caleb Barter as were Stanley, Morton and Cleve. But,
mercifully, she did not know it.

     -     -     -

Barter studied her for several moments; his eyes squinted. He was
making sure that she was not duping him with pretense. Satisfied at
last be turned his eyes away from her. He stepped to the porcelain
slab set in the bronze wall of his laboratory and looked at the
push-buttons marked "C-3" and "E-5". The red lights were on,
indicating that the two puppets controlled by these two keys were
returning toward their master. The lights had been green when Barter
had begun his conversation with Ellen Estabrook, indicating that the
two puppets were still going away. With a tremendous effort of will he
had given them sufficient mental stimulus to keep them traveling
without his direct will for the few minutes he would require for
Ellen.

Now, however, he quickly donned the metal cap and the little ball, and
inserted into the orifice in his cap the swinging key which connected
by chain with the key which fitted into the slot under the button
marked "C-3".

He had returned to his puppets just in time. "C-3" was Cleve, who was
driving the car sent out to bring in the Colombian ape. As Barter got
in touch with the car it narrowly averted a crash with a police car
... and the perspiration broke forth afresh on the body of Barter as
he resumed control of his puppets.

The second creature, in the front seat of the car, was Morton, and it
didn't matter particularly about him as he was not driving. But Morton
was now becoming all ape. Barter did not wish to use any more of his
mental energy than was necessary. He contented himself by sending his
will into Cleve, who began at once to drive like a master. Whenever
Morton, beside him, showed an inclination to jump out of the car or
otherwise interfere with Cleve in his work, Barter had but to express
the thought, and Cleve either pulled him back to his place beside him,
or gave him a walnut from his pocket.

     -     -     -

Barter could as easily have had them change places, since he assumed
control of either at will, or could have controlled a score
simultaneously. But that would have required additional thought
stimulus, and he wished to conserve his mental energies for the work
which yet faced him.

Once he switched his attention from the heliotube which controlled
Cleve--and through which, concurrently, he saw everything that
transpired near Cleve, because his televisory apparatus and his radio
control were co-workers on almost identical vibratory waves--to the
area of Manhattan immediately surrounding his own neighborhood.

"Hmm," he said to himself, "the police are getting too close. As soon
as I have completed my labors to-night I shall destroy some of them as
a warning to others to keep their distance."

Morton and Cleve drew up to the curb while Barter watched carefully on
all sides, through the heliotube, to make sure that their arrival was
unmarked by the police.

They climbed out quickly and raced across the sidewalk to the green
gate which gave on a gloomy old court, inside which they were
swallowed by the shadows from all eyes save those of Caleb Barter.

Five minutes after the strange trio had entered the "place," the great
chrome-steel door of Barter's laboratory swung open.

"Morton and Cleve, my master," announced Naka Machi, bowing low and
sucking in his breath with a hissing sound.

Barter's own puppets entered with the ape between them.

Barter walked fearlessly forward. He had slipped the key from the
orifice atop his head. Morton and Cleve now stood listlessly, dumbly,
looking with dead eyes at their master. Barter tossed them several
walnuts each.

Then he turned his attention to the ape, rubbing his hands together
with pleasure.

But the ape was behaving strangely. His eyes were staring past Barter.
His hands sought to lift as though he would hold them out to someone;
but the ropes prevented him. Barter turned to look. Ellen Estabrook
stood beyond him, white of face, motionless as a statue. The ape was
straining toward her.

Caleb Barter chuckled with understanding.

"Good evening, Lee," he said gently. "I've been expecting you!"




CHAPTER XIII

_Where the Bodies Went_


Bentley had been bound carelessly. Who could expect ape brains to
devise clever bonds, even when controlled by Caleb Barter? And now it
seemed that Caleb Barter had known all along; he said he had been
expecting Bentley. No, that wasn't it. Barter had seen him yearning
toward Ellen Estabrook, statuesque and wide-eyed on the other side of
the room. If it hadn't been for the presence of Ellen he might have
been accepted as an ape. Now it made little difference.

But his bonds were not tightly drawn. He found himself fighting them
fiercely, trying to get his hands on Caleb Barter. He could see the
scrawny Adam's apple of the mad scientist, and his fingers itched to
press themselves into the flesh.

Caleb Barter stood his ground calmly. "Naka Machi," he said softly.

Suddenly Bentley felt a dull, paralyzing blow on his skull. He knew it
had been intended to render him utterly unconscious. But Naka Machi
hadn't taken into consideration that his skull was protected by the
hide of an ape. He remembered, as he stumbled and fell forward, that
the Japanese were wizards with their hands. That's why Naka Machi
could knock him down, render him helpless, yet leave his brain as
clearly active as before. Perhaps clearer, even, for now his brain did
not act on his legs and arms, which were helpless.

Bentley felt as he imagined a patient on the operating table might
feel when not given sufficient anesthetic, yet given enough to make
him incapable of speech or movement. Such a patient would hear the
soft discussions of the surgeons, see them prepare their instruments,
yet be unable to tell them that he wasn't entirely unconscious.

     -     -     -

Barter stooped over Bentley and rolled back the lids of his eyes.

"Good. Naka Machi!" he said. "He won't be in any position to do us an
injury. Remain powerless, Lee Bentley, but retain your knowledge."

Barter, then, was familiar with the strange hypnosis which the blow of
Naka Machi's hand had put upon Bentley. Barter had taken advantage of
it to add to it a sort of mental paralysis, so that the condition
would continue.

"You are in my hands, Lee," he said in paternal fashion, "but you can
do me no harm. Since you were associated with me in the first of my
great experiments you know much about me. I have never ceased to hope
that you would one day understand and appreciate what I am doing for
humanity and be brought to aid me. Perhaps if I force you to watch my
efforts you will understand them and sympathize with my ambitions."

Bentley could say nothing. Barter's eyes seemed to leap at him growing
large and glaring, just as the eyes of caricatured animals leap at the
camera in trick motion pictures. Physically he was powerless. Only his
brain was active.

"Remove this covering from him, Naka Machi," went on Barter. "Remove
his bonds. You are about his size. Garb him in some of your own
clothing."

Bentley had the odd feeling that he didn't need to turn his head to
see things around him. His head felt huge, almost to bursting, and his
eyes felt huge, too, so that he could see in all directions, as though
his eyeballs had been fish-eye lenses.

     -     -     -

He studied Naka Machi. A nasty opponent in a fight, he decided. He
hadn't figured on any opponent other than Barter. This man was almost
as great. The skill of his fingers as he quickly removed the ape skin
from Bentley, using scalpels taken from Barter's table, amazed Bentley
with their miraculous dexterity. He cleaned Bentley's body with some
solution in a sponge and clothed him in some of his own clothing which
fitted fairly well.

Then he lifted Bentley from the floor and stood him against the wall.

Bentley was unbound. He tried to lift his hands but they refused to
move. His feet, too, seemed anchored to the floor. His knees were
stiff and straight. He might as well have been a wooden image for all
his ability to get about.

Now Barter spoke.

"Come here, Lee," he said.

Bentley was amazed at the kindliness in Barter's attitude. He dealt
with Bentley as though he had been his son. He felt that Barter
genuinely liked him. It was rather amazing. Barter liked him but would
remove him without compunction if he thought it necessary.

Bentley found he could move his feet, or rather they seemed to move of
their own volition, as he crossed the room to stand before Barter.

"I'm rather proud of what I have been able to do, Lee," went on
Barter, "and I am now entirely safe from the police. I've issued
another manifesto telling the public that for each attempt made
against me, one of the eighteen men captured by me to-day will die.
Manhattan is the abode of terror. Here, see for yourself."

He extended to Bentley what seemed to be a pair of binoculars, but
with the ear-hooks common to ordinary spectacles. He set them over
Bentley's eyes and set them in place.

"Now you can survey New York as you wish."

     -     -     -

Bentley looked for a moment or two. Sixth Avenue was a deserted
highway, on which red and green lights blinked off and on in the usual
routine, signaling to drivers who were non-existent. There were vistas
of deserted streets and avenues. There were some few living
things--policemen in uniform, standing in pairs and larger groups, all
concentrated in an area covering no more than twenty acres, which
twenty acres included the hideout of Caleb Barter. Bentley knew that
the hideout was under Millegan Place. He had recognized it coming in.
A secret panel in a brick wall had opened to show a door where none
was apparent. Then a circular stairway leading down into darkness to
the room which Barter had gouged out of the earth and turned into a
laboratory of hell.

"See the police?" asked Barter. "They know now where I am, but they
are helpless because of my hostages. I shall now begin the operations
I believe to be necessary. Then I shall issue another manifesto,
telling the public that I am safeguarded by great apes whose ability
will prove the correctness of my theory about the possibility of
creating a race of supermen. My manifesto shall say that my apes must
not be slain. It shall say that for every ape slain by the police one
of my eighteen hostages will die."

Bentley would have gasped with horror, but he could not. Now he saw
Thomas Tyler, his face a white mask of despair, in the midst of his
helpless men.

"I'll give you a hand, somehow, Tommy," Bentley whispered deep down
inside him.

"Now you shall see what I do, Lee," said Caleb Barter. "Naka Machi,
bring the ape skin you took from my friend. Bentley, you will follow
us."

     -     -     -

Barter removed the strange glasses from Bentley's eyes, blotting out
the deserted streets and avenues of Manhattan. Naka Machi followed
behind Bentley, carrying the ape skin in which Bentley had penetrated
the stronghold of Caleb Barter.

The chrome-steel door swung silently back and the three entered
another room filled with blaring light. Without being able to look
back Bentley knew that Ellen, white of face and staring, followed at
their heels.

There was a long white operating table in this room, and a smaller
chrome-steel door set some four feet above the floor in one wall.

"Naka Machi, the incineration tube," said Barter brusquely.

Naka Machi stepped to the operating table and dug into one of the
drawers. He brought out a white tube, closed at one end, about an
inch in diameter, eight inches in length, and snowy white.

"Concentrated fire, Bentley," said Barter. "Watch!"

Barter had Naka Machi cast the ape skin through the small steel door,
beyond which Bentley could see a boxlike space large enough to
accommodate two or three grown men, lying side by side at full length.
It seemed to be indirectly lighted. The ape skin dropped on the floor
of this compartment. Barter took the "incineration tube" and directed
it on the skin. Bentley heard the clicking of a button.

The ape skin charred quickly, folded up, drew into itself,
disappeared--and a fine gray ash settled on the floor of the
compartment, like rain from the roof of the ghastly little space.

"Now you understand that I have solved the problem of disposing of the
cumbersome useless bodies of my hostages, Lee," said Baxter, rubbing
his hands together as though he washed them.

Bentley's heart leaped as Naka Machi placed the incineration tube on
the operating table. It was close enough that Bentley could have
reached it, had he not been utterly powerless to move.

"Naka Machi," said Barter. "Bring me ape D-4 and Frank Keller, the
diplomat. Ellen, clear the operating table. Quickly, now! Bentley,
stand against the wall and do not move--but miss nothing I do."




CHAPTER XIV

_The Straining Prison_


Then began a grim series of activities which combined to form a
nightmare Bentley was never to forget, even as he prayed within him
that no slightest memory of it would remain in the brain of Ellen
Estabrook.

Naka Machi went back to the room which Bentley had first entered and
returned almost at once with a tall thin man, immaculately garbed in
gray, wearing a spade beard. His eyes were flashing fires of anger and
of pride.

He stared at Barter.

"What is all this quackery?" he demanded. "Who is responsible for this
unspeakable rigmarole?"

"Your words are harsh, Mr. Keller," said Barter suavely, "and you
shall learn in good time what I intend. Had you followed my
manifestoes in the news columns you would have known what I intend. I
shall create a race of super--"

"You will at once release myself and the others with me," interrupted
Keller.

But at that moment Naka Machi returned, leading a great ape which
seemed as docile as though it had been drugged. Naka Machi raised his
right hand quickly, so quickly Bentley could scarce follow the
movement, and with the edge of his palm struck the tall gray man in
back of the head. Keller's knees buckled. As he started to fall Naka
Machi stepped close to him, gathered him in his arms and bore him to
the table.

At Barter's swift instructions Ellen Estabrook, all unknowing, placed
a cone indicated by Barter over the mouth and nose of Keller. Naka
Machi struck the ape as he had struck the man, but he waited until he
had persuaded the brute to take his place on the table near Keller's
head.

     -     -     -

The ape sprawled. Naka Machi quickly twisted both Keller and the ape
around so that their heads were toward each other, their feet pointing
in opposite directions.

"Is that close enough my master?" came the soft voice of Naka Machi.

"Quite," said Barter, whose face was now a mask of concentration.
"Cleve and Stanley and Morton?"

"They have been locked in their cages, my master," said Naka Machi.
"Are you sure this man who came in the guise of an ape is safe?"

"I shall make sure. But do you remain close where you can render him
harmless in case I have misjudged him."

Naka Machi turned baleful eyes on Bentley. The latter could see the
hatred in them and for a moment was at a loss to understand it.

"I shall destroy him before he can put his hands upon you, my master,"
said Naka Machi.

"I do not wish him destroyed, Naka Machi," replied Barter. "That is
enough of the anesthetic, Miss Estabrook. Naka Machi, my instruments,
quickly."

Before he proceeded with his labors Barter stood in front of Bentley
and stared at him for a moment. Bentley felt the strength flow out of
him under the gaze of this man--a gaze he could not avoid. Barter
smiled slightly.

"You will eventually join me of your own free will, Lee," he said
softly.

"I would rather die a thousand deaths!" screamed Bentley, but the
sound of his scream echoed and reechoed through his soul without
coming out so that Barter could hear it.

     -     -     -

Barter's confidence in his ability to convert Bentley was assuredly a
mark of his twisted mind, for he must surely have realized that
Bentley would be the most injured by his schemes. But he seemed to
associate him with the days of Manape, when Barter had proved to
himself, to Bentley and Ellen Estabrook, that the operation he now
planned in wholesale proportions was possible. Bentley could
understand why Barter regarded him as a friend and colleague, and his
animosity temporary--because as a subject of his first great
experiment Bentley was a symbol of Barter's success.

Strange how easy it was to find logic in the reasoning of madmen, and
to understand that logic!

Barter sprang back to his task.

"Naka Machi," he said, "take heed that you serve me well. Do you like
this woman?"

"Yes, my master."

"If you continue in your loyalty to me, I shall give her to you."

Bentley's mind recoiled with horror. The shock of this cold statement
was like another blow on the head. He wanted to leap forward and set
strangling fingers about the neck of Naka Machi. Ordinarily Naka Machi
could handle him with ease, but now that Bentley had heard the plan of
Barter, he could have handled the Japanese with superhuman strength.
But he could not move. He strained against the bodily lethargy which
held him prisoner. If only he could move forward and grasp the
incineration tube, he would turn it on Naka Machi and Barter....

But he could not move, could not fight off the lethargy which was like
invincible prison walls around him.

He could move the tips of his fingers, he discovered ... but no more
than that. The shock of Barter's calm statement had cast off that much
of his semi-hypnotic lethargy. A minute before he hadn't been able
even to move his fingers.

     -     -     -

Give him time, he told himself, while inwardly he bled as he struggled
desperately to throw off the grim hypnosis, and he would yet manage to
save the lives of at least some of the eighteen, see that Ellen won
free, and destroy this hell-hole under Millegan Place.

Now incredibly slender instruments were busy near the heads of the two
on the operating table--the ape and Keller, the doomed man. As the
knives and scalpels leaped to their work with startling dexterity and
amazing speed, Bentley strained again against his horrid invisible
prison. If only he could save this man Keller from this horror ... but
it was useless.

The fingers of Barter worked swiftly over the skull of the ape, first.
Naka Machi stood on one side of the long table, Ellen on the other,
near Barter. Bentley studied her face as the skull of the ape fell
open under the hands of Barter, and he knew she was unaware of what
she was doing. Bentley had expected a crimson horror, but nothing of
the kind developed. Could Barter read his thoughts?

"I am an adept at bloodless surgery, Bentley," he said, while his
fingers never ceased their swift manipulations.

Now Naka Machi held the skull-pan of the ape, from which he had
removed the reddish substance which was the ape's brain. This Naka
Machi had tossed into the aperture where the ape skin had been
destroyed.

The empty skull-pan of the ape awaited the brain of Keller.

Bentley could feel the sweat burst forth on him in every pore as he
tried to throw off his awful inertia, to go to the aid of Keller. If
Barter should see the perspiration on his cheeks....

Bentley thought of Samson in the midst of his enemies, blind and
beaten, of how he had prayed to be given strength to pull down the
pillars of the temple....

"Oh God," said Bentley to himself, "only this once give me strength to
throw off these chains. Grant that I do something to save the man from
this horror."

     -     -     -

But he could still move only the tips of his fingers when Barter had
finally closed the sutures in the skull-pan of the ape, renewing again
the ape's skull, with the brain of Keller inside. Keller was finished.
He had not moved on the table. Even his chest stood still, stark and
lifeless. Barter had not troubled to restore Keller's skull-pan. What
was the need?

Naka Machi gathered up the carcass of Keller and bore it swiftly to
the boxlike hole in the wall of the ghastly room....

He thrust it in. He stepped back and caught up the incineration tube
of concentrated fire ... and Bentley saw the body of the murdered man
shrivel up so quickly it seemed as though it had dissolved before his
eyes. Down from the ceiling of the hell-hole dropped the fine gray
ash, all that remained--save the imprisoned brain--of Frank Keller,
the diplomat.

Now Bentley was cognizant of something else. With Barter's concentrated
work on Keller, something of the power went out of him. Ever so slightly
Bentley could feel that Barter was lacking in strength. Some of his
will, some of the essential essence of his brain, of his soul, had
been expended in the operation--and by so much was Bentley enabled to
move. For now he could move two full fingers on each hand. But how
carefully he kept watch to see that neither Naka Machi nor Barter
noticed that he was bursting from his invisible prison.

If he could get that incineration tube. He'd do the necessary things
first ... then direct the ray of it against the softer portions of the
hideout of Barter. The flame would eat through. Somewhere it would
finally reach wood; that was inflammable.

There would be smoke, and fire ... and in the end people would come.
Tyler would be watching for a sign, anyway. Barter had said that the
police knew approximately where he, Barter, was located.

     -     -     -

"Now, Bentley," said Barter, "I'll explain what I intend doing while I
rest a moment before the next ordeal. The whole world is against me
now because it regards my experiments as horrible, but if I prove to
the world that I am right, and that the men of my creation are
supermen, in the end the world will be on my side. I can force it to
obey me, in time, but I prefer the world to serve me willingly,
because it realizes that what I do for civilization should really be
done."

Bentley said nothing, because he could not speak.

"I'll send Keller to his office under my instructions," said Barter.
"Of course I'll issue a manifesto, first, so that the city will know
that it is not a wild ape that has escaped. When the new Keller, with
the strong brain of Keller and the mighty body of an ape, appears at
his office and proves to his people that he has been vastly improved
by my experiment...."

Bentley tried to shut his mind to the horrible picture Barter's words
drew before his eyes. Barter broke off short, while Bentley's mind
seemed to rock with the shock of Barter's last statement. He saw a
picture ... a great office filled with many desks occupied by
white-faced men and women ... an ornate desk where a "manape" sat....
It was ghastly beyond comprehension. It must never come to pass.

Barter spoke again to Naka Machi.

"Bring me David Fator and ape S-19."

"Yes, my master," replied Naka Machi.

     -     -     -

Again Bentley went through the horror from beginning to end. He could
now move his toes. If only he could fall forward, grasp that
incineration tube, turn it on Barter! With Barter unable to control
him he would regain his senses in time, he hoped, to stave off the
certain charge of Naka Machi, whose hatred for himself he now
understood too well.

He hoped, if he were able to accomplish what he planned, that horror
upon awakening would cause Ellen to faint. While she was out he could
destroy the horror with the cleansing flame ... and tell her she
hadn't seen it, after all.

Bentley could feel the strength pour back into him. Barter was
becoming moment by moment more intent on his labors. He was becoming
careless with Bentley, not because he underestimated him but because
he was intensely absorbed in his work.

By the time two more men had gone bodily into the incinerator and
mentally into a pair of apes, the first ape, carelessly dumped on the
floor, came out from under the effects of the drug.

"Stand over there in the corner, Keller," Barter said to the hybrid
carelessly, "and remember that no matter how you may wish to escape
you can only do so if I will. Remain quiet there and consider whether
you will oppose me or obey me. Oppose me and your only escape is
self-destruction. Obey me and possess the world!"

Bentley could imagine the horror and despair of "Keller," for he
himself had known that horror and despair.

Now he could swing his wrists slightly. Naka Machi turned once with a
sudden movement and almost caught him at it, and perspiration broke
out on Bentley's face again. Thank God, Ellen realized none of what
she was experiencing.

     -     -     -

Two other men gave their lives at Barter's hands ... yet Bentley had
only regained sufficient possession of himself to fall forward on his
face if he tried to walk, but even that was something.

Five men were gone now. Could he possibly regain muscular control in
time to save the lives of some of the eighteen? As he watched the five
go into the furnace, one by one, he began to despair of saving any of
the eighteen, but with each operation Barter lost mental strength. If
he lost in arithmetical progression as he had during the last five,
Bentley estimated that he, Bentley, would be able to move his arms
enough to grasp the incineration tube by the time Barter had finished
his eighth transplantation.

So, the horror growing until nausea ate at Bentley's stomach like
voracious maggots, he watched Barter destroy three more men and
create godless monsters in their places. As each manape regained
consciousness Barter told him what he had told Keller--and Naka Machi
took them out, one by one, and placed them in their allotted cages.

Naka Machi placed the eighth man in the furnace, returned the
incineration tube to the table.

"Now, oh God the Father!" moaned Bentley.

He leaned forward, striving with all his will to force his hands to go
truly to their target as he fell. He had little or no control of his
legs or knees. But let him once hold that tube in his hands....

He fell soundlessly, his hands clutching for the tube. His fingers
touched it as he crashed to the floor, and it fell near him. His
fingers fumbled for the tube and now gripped it tightly.

From under the table, writhing and twisting, striving to break his
mental bondage, Bentley saw the legs of Caleb Barter. He snapped the
button on the tube and turned its open end toward those legs.

"I must not look into his eyes as he falls," thought Bentley, "or all
is lost."

     -     -     -

A terrible scream rang through the operating room. Barter was falling,
crumpling as he fell, and as his body slid downward past the table
edge, Bentley held the end of the tube toward it. As the bodies of the
eight had shriveled, so shriveled the body of Caleb Barter.

Ellen Estabrook screamed horribly, and sprawled on the floor within a
foot or two of Bentley. Nature had mercifully sent her into momentary
oblivion when the will of Barter, holding her in thrall, had snapped
to show her the horror of what she did.

Naka Machi was screaming. Bentley was Bentley again, crawling forth
from under the table. Naka Machi met him in a rush and dissolved
before the deadly ray as though he had never existed. Its effect must
have been a silent explosion, for a fine gray ash came down from the
ceiling as the residue which falls when a soaring rocket has exploded
and expended its power. The gray ash was Naka Machi, forever rendered
harmless to Ellen.

Bentley walked over and stood looking at the manapes in their cages.
What could be done with them? There was no hope, no possible way by
which they could resume their normal lives, for of their human bodies
there remained but heaps of fine powdery ashes.

Suddenly the manape Keller swept his great hairy arm out between the
bars and snatched the tube from Bentley's hand. With a cry of mortal
anguish Bentley recoiled from the cage. God! Now all was lost if the
manape clicked on the deadly ray and swept it over the room.

Before he could formulate a plan of action, the manape pressed the
fatal button. With a cry Bentley threw himself across the room to
where Ellen lay unconscious, his only thought to somehow protect her
from the tube.

     -     -     -

But the manape, Keller, swung the ray upon the other apes with the
human minds, and they dissolved into ashy nothingness with bewildering
rapidity. The keen mind of Keller was doing what he knew must be done
for the good of everyone concerned.

Numbed with horror, Bentley saw the ray directed on Morton and
Stanley. They fell silently and without protest....

Keller clicked off the button and looked over at Bentley. He alone
remained of Barter's frightful experiment. He alone remained and it
seemed that he was trying to tell Bentley something ... asking him to
now take the tube and turn it full on the body which housed his human
brain.

While Bentley hesitated, the manape bent down and placed the tube on
the floor of the cage, the muzzle pointing inward. With a clumsy
motion of a long hairy arm he reached out and snicked on the button,
then placed himself within its deadly range. Keller vanished and the
ray bit into the wall back of the cage; began to eat through.

Bentley leaped to his feet and tore across the floor. He plunged his
trembling hand through the bars of the cage, switched off the button
and lifted the tube.

There were the remaining normal apes. They could have been saved for
transportation to the zoo, but horror was on Bentley and he used the
tube again, and yet again....

And there were the keys. He pulled them from their slots in the
porcelain slab, in case there should be other "Stanley-Morton-Cleves"
abroad of whom he knew nothing....

He turned the tube against the red lights and the green lights.

Then he turned the tube upward and held it steadily. He watched the
charred hole grow bigger and deeper in the high ceiling....

When at last he heard the approaching clang of the fire engine bells
and the screaming triumph of police sirens, he carefully snicked off
the button of the tube and returned to lift the form of Ellen in arms
that were strong to hold her.

(_The end._)




                  *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Changes:

  Page 30: Added closing double-quote (Ellen. "I haven't
           looked at an American paper for ever so =long."=)

  Page 32: Was 'that' (Bentley suddenly knew =what= the man
           was trying to say. The half-uttered)

  Page 32: Was 'interne' (Five minutes later the ambulance
           =intern= hastily scribbled in his record the entry, "Dead
           on Arrival.")

  Page 41: Added closing double-quote (chauffeur to go faster
           than twenty miles an =hour."=)

  Page 44: Was 'scarely' (The words had =scarcely= left his
           mouth when a blind man, tapping)

  Page 45: Was 'multilated' (Bentley, in his mind's eye, saw
           the two dead, =mutilated= drivers, and the passengers with
           them, he saw)

  Page 45: Was 'relinquished' ("When will he give up--and
           what will his driver do when Barter =relinquishes=
           control?")

  Page 45: Changed ',' to '.' (effective. The fleeing car was
           trapped. Barter must know =that.= If he did know, it proved
           that he)

  Page 46: Was 'plainclothes' (reached her. She had been
           immediately picked up by =plain-clothes= men and had
           thought herself captured)

  Page 46: Was 'persuuaded' (she told Bentley, and it had
           taken her some little time to be =persuaded= that she was
           in the hands)

  Page 242: Was 'monolog' ("You will almost suffocate," he
            said, keeping up a running =monologue= as his inspired
            hands worked with)

  Page 257: Was 'at loss' (hatred in them and for a moment
            was =at a loss= to understand it.)






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mind Master, by Arthur J. Burks

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIND MASTER ***

***** This file should be named 29416-8.txt or 29416-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/2/9/4/1/29416/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Dan Horwood and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
